Ladies and gentlemen, good day.
Let me introduce.
I am Sergey Georgievich Searyakov,
a professor of the All-Russian Academy
of Foreign Trade, the Ministry of
Economic Development and Trade,
who has lived classes on cargo MBA
in our academy, as well as in the
Academy of Economics under the Government
of the Russian Federation.
We will discuss the issues
of micro- and macroeconomics.
It is possible that many of you have
already faced such a science,
which is called, well, it
can be called differently.
Most often, the economic theory, sometimes
economics, in the English-
language literature So, micro and
macro economics are two components
of this science.
And again, if you have done this
before, you know that economics
theory is written in thick
textbooks, whole volumes.
To recount all their content is not
possible, and you probably do not
need it.
So I decided on those questions
that can be interesting
and useful for you, as for people practical.
Therefore, I think my course is best
called economics for practitioners.
They speak in the West managerial
economics or literal translation
of management economics.
Please see what topics we
will address in this course.
I would like to draw your attention that
in addition to the lectures course
you are offered a full printed
course of lectures.
It would be good to read this course.
At the end of each topic you will
find a checkup.
It would be good to resolve them.
I recommend you pay special attention
to case studies, that is, to the analysis
of practical situations.
Well, to complete this course
is probably the best solution
to a control test.
I wish you success, let's start.
So look again.
The first is an introduction to economics.
Two questions on this topic.
The first is economics as a science.
Well, the introductory topic, I will stop
on it very briefly.
And first of all, I would like
to tell you what this is for
science, economy, where it
came from, how it arose.
It arose from such a very simple
contradiction.
People's needs are limitless,
and the resources they have
to meet these needs
are unfortunately limited.
If this is the case, then there is a problem
of choice.
A few basic examples.
Here you come to the store.
No matter how rich you
are, the amount of money
you have is limited.
But you will agree, you will
not buy just bread or only milk.
What is your task?
You need to buy some optimal
set of benefits for the
limited amount of money you have.
That is, the set
that best meets your
needs.
That is, you solve a typical economic
problem associated with the problem
of choice.
Or a firm.
The company cannot produce everything.
They also have limited resources.
What is her task?
The best way to use limited
resources is to get
maximum profit.
The local authorities would like to build
a school, a road, and a hospital.
Again, there are not enough resources.
Again, we have to choose.
So, how people, firms, society as
a whole make their choices in the
context of limited resources,
this is what economic theory
is dealing with.
Please look at the following
slide.
Object of Economy.
In fact, economics is studying.
Here we look.
Object of Economy.
A decision taken in a society
when distributing limited
resources between
different uses to maximize
people's well-being.
But that's what I've already told you.
Economic theory is exactly what it deals
with, how people, firms, societies
as a whole make their choices in the
conditions of limited resources.
Let us see further.
The next slide.
When you have to make a choice,
you should answer three main questions.
The first question.
How much to produce?
The second.
How to produce?
The Third.
For whom to produce?
Again the simplest example.
Local authorities.
We would like to build a school, a road, a
hospital, all the resources are not enough.
The first question they
have to answer.
What to produce?
well well.
Suppose we chose the road.
But immediately comes another question.
The road can actually be built
differently.
You can push, say, a regiment of soldiers
with the loops.
You can use less manual
work and more machines.
After that, what is it about?
Choosing the right production
technology.
We built the road.
In short, the cake is baked.
What should we do next?
Then we share this cake.
So the question arises which?
For whom to produce?
In the application to the road, this
may mean this.
You can make the road paid or free.
If we make the road free, we answer
the question for whom to produce,
for whom the road.
If there is a free road, it is a
road for all who want to.
If it is paid, it is already
a road for those who can
pay the required amount.
Maybe a compromise option.
The road can be free for residents
of our region and paid for residents
of other regions.
Three main issues of economic
choice.
And then, see, I said before that
economic theory consists of
two parts.
Microeconomics and macroeconomics.
What are they studying?
Look at the slide.
Microeconomics studies the behavior
of individual economic agents and their
interaction in individual markets.
Individual economic agents can
be, for example, a separate
firm or a separate household.
And the focus of microeconomics
is on the prices and production volumes
of individual goods, the choice
of individual consumers, the
output of resources of individual
firms, and so on.
Macroeconomics, in turn, studies
the economy as a whole as a
single system.
And in the center of its attention
such generalizing indicators
of social production, such
as the domestic product,
economic growth, unemployment,
inflation, and so on.
Well, let's find out a few simple
examples.
Let's say that X has fired 100
people.
What is the Economist Theory?
of the microeconomy.
Why is?
This is because it is a matter of individual
company behavior.
In Russia, the unemployment rate has declined.
In this case, what is it about?
Economy in general.
This is about macroeconomics.
So think about it.
Micro or Macro?
Actually a micro.
It is actually a microeconomy.
Why is?
Because in this case we are talking
about a market for a single product,
even a very large market.
Microeconomics studies individual markets,
markets of individual goods.
But a separate market is not necessarily
the marketplace of our village.
A separate market can be the global
market, for example, the global
oil market.
It is a subject of microeconomics.
And a few more comments on the same subject.
We should not think that
microeconomics is dealing with things
that are less important, less significant.
In fact, everything big
comes from the small.
It is impossible to understand how a forest
develops without knowing the laws
under which individual trees grow.
And in general, look, the micro
console literally means small, but
it is not really a matter of size.
The object of microeconomics may be larger
than the object of macroeconomics.
The simplest example, for example,
Microsoft, a separate company.
Its activity relates to the course of
microeconomics, but at the same time,
in terms of annual output,
Microsoft exceeds the domestic
product of, for example, Luxembourg.
But the Luxembourg economy is a
macroeconomy, an object of macroeconomy.
What is going?
The object of microeconomics, I repeat,
may be larger than the object
of macroeconomics.
And another comment.
There is no need to separate
any wall and micro and macroeconomics.
In fact, they flow smoothly
into each other.
Please look at
the slide.
The next slide.
We will talk to you about something
very important.
Both economic costs.
I have said that the main
problem of economic theory is the
problem of rational choice.
And as soon as we make a choice,
the concept of economic costs arises.
This is probably the most important
concept in economics.
I will stay on it in more detail.
First the definition.
At first glance, it may seem
difficult to you.
There is actually nothing complicated.
I will explain.
Please look at the definition.
We read.
The economic costs of obtaining
a good are other goods that
could be obtained with the same
resources, but which will
have to be abandoned if the choice
is made in favor of
that good.
I think you should be the first
to take your example.
You came to study some science,
say, the same economy.
So tell me, please answer yourself
the question, what are your
costs of studying this
course?
We are actually talking
about costs.
Let me explain what your cost
of studying economics is.
Well, it is likely that many
of you first remembered
the fee for training.
It doesn't really matter how much
you pay, but how much you pay.
Of course, tuition is your
cost, but economists make
some adjustments.
Now the annual course of study
at the Moscow University,
at the Faculty of Economics,
is probably about 7 thousand
units.
At the end of the 19th century,
the annual rate was about 30 rubles.
It means that then it was
cheap, and now it is expensive.
I hope you understand that nothing like that.
So, is that what economists say?
And economists say that when
you pay money for getting some
good, such as education, you
spend, you lose not that money,
but what other goods you
could buy with that money.
Here are those unreceived benefits and
are your losses or your costs associated
with receiving the
good in question.
Well, for example, you could study
economics, and you could spend economics.
If you study economics, you will
not be able to rest normally.
This is your loss related to the
study of economics.
Someone could buy a new coat
instead of studying economics.
So, the costs associated with
studying this course, the absence
of a shirt, loss or cost.
well well well.
What else do you lose by studying economics?
In addition to paying for your studies,
you are still wasting time.
But again, it's not the time
itself, but what benefits
you could acquire during
that time.
What benefits are you losing?
Each in different.
Someone would work more,
earn more money,
instead of studying.
What will be included in
the cost of education?
The lost salary, or rather the
benefits that could have been bought
for that salary.
Someone could repair an apartment
instead of studying.
What will be included in the alternative
costs?
It is a disappointment to
live in an unrepaired dirty apartment.
Instead of learning, you
can raise a child.
What is the alternative
cost of getting education?
An uneducated child.
Someone could just rest.
Therefore, alternative costs will be included
in education.
What?
Lost pleasure of watching
your favorite series.
What does it get?
What to estimate alternative costs,
obtaining this benefit, yes,
forgot to say, alternative costs
and economic costs are
synonyms.
To estimate the alternative costs
of receiving this benefit, you need to estimate
all the losses that you are incurred
in connection with this.
Now, in order to bring these losses
to a single denominator, the value
of these losses would of course
be desirable to be expressed in
monetary units.
Well, I would like to make a
few more comments about alternative
costs, very important, which
must be taken into account.
The first observation.
Alternative costs arise only
where there is an alternative.
There is no alternative,
no alternative or economic cost.
Let us give an example.
I've said before, we're considering
a situation when you decide to
study a new course.
During this course you should
spend money on food.
Will the cost of food be included
in the alternative costs of learning
data, receiving education?
No, they will not enter.
And here is why.
Because you have to eat
anyway, whether you
study or not.
Alternative costs arise
only where there is an
alternative.
If you have to bear costs regardless
of whether you are doing it
or not, then these costs are
not included in alternative
costs.
Let us give such an example.
Here is the road.
It leads from point A to point B.
How are two tracks.
On this side the cars go from A to
B, on this side the cars obviously
go from B to A.
You have to get by car from A to
B.
Where will you catch the car?
On which side will you stand?
Well, obviously, the elementary
life experience suggests that you
will be standing somewhere here.
Explain your behavior from the perspective
of alternative cost theory.
I will say immediately that the turnover from
A to B is temporary, if the car is going
this way, and you decide to become all-
yet here, the turnover will be considered
to be zero.
Why are you all standing here?
Let us discuss.
What do you want?
Obviously, you want to get from A to B
as cheaply as possible.
And obviously, you think the driver
will take the smaller amount of money
from you the less it costs.
Sooo with this question.
What are the alternative costs
of the driver to transport you, you,
from A to B, if he still goes
there?
They are zero or close to zero.
Why is?
Because if he still drives in this direction,
then neither his time nor his gasoline
consumption will be included in the
alternative costs of transporting
you, he still drives in this
direction.
There will be alternative
costs.
But they are related to what?
Not wanting to have a stranger
in the room.
Little you throw out.
But if you are a nice lady, then,
I dare assure you, there are no
costs, only benefits.
Therefore, of course, the lady is most
likely to stop the car faster than the men.
And look what would happen if you caught
the car standing here.
The cars go from B to A, and you need from
A to B.
You will deploy the car, but then
the alternative costs of the driver
will be much higher.
Then the alternative costs of the
driver to transport you from A to
B, if he is driving from B to A, these
costs will include everything, and
lost time, and fuel costs, and everything.
Imagine that here at point A is
an international airport, and the
driver is going to fly out
to rest abroad.
You are his airport and you will
be lucky in B, but you will have
to pay him a lot because his
alternative costs in this
case will be very high.
We live in a world of alternatives,
there are many alternatives.
All alternatives cannot
be implemented at the same time.
Therefore, when you assess the
alternative costs of obtaining some
benefit, you must choose the best
of the possible alternatives.
The example.
Let's say that some women have
a choice for today.
Today she has several
alternatives.
Well well well.
What are the alternatives for the evening?
to rest.
and rest.
Just rest at home, watch TV.
Meeting with Thomas.
Meeting with Jeremy.
Studying the economy.
There are four alternatives.
The question.
What will be included in the alternative
cost of rest?
It is impossible to implement all together.
You cannot meet with Thomas and Jeremiah
at the same time, and also
study economics at the same time.
To estimate alternative cost
of rest, what should be considered?
The value of the best of the other alternatives.
Well, obviously what is it?
Studies of Economics.
So, in the alternative cost of
rest will include, in this case,
the lost pleasure of studying
economics.
Well, in the first approximation, I
hope that the economic or
alternative costs we have solved with you.
But there is another very practical
concept, very important for practice,
the concept of non-refundable costs.
Please look at the slide.
After the determination of
economic costs, the determination
of non-refundable costs is given.
What is written there?
Irreversible costs are costs
that have been incurred before
and cannot be reimbursed.
Economists do not take this
cost into account.
Let us look at the example.
You are at a crossroads.
Here is the starting point.
You have the choice to study or not to study.
To make the right choice, you need to estimate
the benefits and losses, that is,
the costs you incur in connection
with the study.
What benefits do you get from studying?
Well, you probably expect to finish
your studies for a higher
salary or a more successful
career.
Someone who likes
to learn, I've met too.
And let's say that the benefits of
getting education you could estimate
in rubles conditionally.
Suppose you think that if you go to
study, then you will get different
benefits of 120 rubles.
well well.
But on the other hand, if you
go to study, you will suffer some
losses.
What losses?
We have already talked about them.
You will lose what?
The salary?
Maybe maybe.
You will have to pay for your studies.
You can rest less.
All of this is your losses, all of this is
your costs related to your studies.
If you didn't start studying, what would
you get?
You would save on the fee for study.
You would have more rest, and so
on and so on.
Let's say that you estimate it at
100 rubles.
If you go to school, how much
do you get?
Profits of 120 rubles, but suffered
losses of 100 rubles.
Obviously what?
The benefits outweigh the costs.
So it is worth starting the study.
If you think rationally, of course.
OK is.
They started studying, paid money,
just started studying, and
faced a very unpleasant surprise.
Teaching worse than you expected.
Which of the two numbers does this mean?
Bad study.
But obviously the benefits.
If you are being taught badly, what do you mean?
Get the benefits of education for a
smaller amount.
Suppose it turned out that with
this quality of learning you If
you reason rationally, you would
not go to study.
In fact, what is the point?
How much benefit do you get?
At 80 rubles, and lose at 100.
It is not necessary to learn, obviously, but there
is a nuance.
Let's say that of these 100 rubles
of cost, 50 rubles, let's say,
it's a tuition fee, and 50
rubles, in 50 rubles you estimate
all the other losses.
And let's say, again, that under the terms
of the contract you have money at the time
of the start of the study.
What does this mean?
What is when you were here at this
point, those 50 rubles you have
already paid have turned into irreversible
costs for you, which will
not be reimbursed
to you under any circumstances.
Even if you continue to study, even
if you quit.
What are your options now, when you
have already started studying
at this point?
Continue to study or what?
Or quit studying.
Continue or quit.
What do you think of when you are already
at this point?
Yes, I was fooled by promising the best knowledge.
But now, if I continue studying, how
much benefit will I get?
for 80 rubles.
What are my costs in connection
with continuing studies, alternative costs?
Only 50 already.
That 50 rubles will not be
returned.
You continue to study even if
you stop it.
So what will those 50 rubles
be in?
In irreversible costs.
These are no longer alternative costs.
At this stage, you should not take
them into account.
Economists do not take into account
non-refundable costs.
They look forward.
Here is another example to make
it easier to understand this.
You are abroad.
You bought a ticket for a yacht tour.
During the tour you are photographed.
And it wasn't time to end, the tour
hasn't yet finished, as the
photos are already shown,
printed, hanging on a rope.
You are not asked to take photos,
you are not forced to buy photos.
You can decide whether to buy or not to buy.
The photos are expensive,
$3 per piece.
Well, let's ask yourself what are
the alternative costs of a photographer
at the moment when all the photos
are already shown, I repeat,
printed and hanging on a rope.
What are they equal?
If you think they include the cost
of the film, the cost of the photographer'
s work, then you're wrong.
Note that at the time when the photos
are already taken, the alternative
cost of the photographer
is zero.
Why is?
Because at this point he
had already borne all his
expenses, and his expenses
became irreversible.
If so, what kind of behavior
would you best choose?
Of course to negotiate.
How to do it best?
You have to go to the photographer, just
take the eye in the eye and say.
Here is a great job, beautiful
photos.
I like these three very much.
What to do?
During this tour I spent all
my money.
I only have one dollar.
You can even open your wallet
and show him that dollar.
I understand that it's not good, but
I didn't know, dear, what could I do?
I didn't know there would
be such great photos.
I spent all my money.
I only have one dollar.
I like these three photos.
You can put that dollar in front
of him, take pictures.
He will be unhappy, but he will
not pursue you.
Why is?
I repeat again.
What is the alternative for that moment?
What can he do with your photo?
You may be a highly respected member
of society, but you are not Julia
Roberts or Michael Jackson.
So what is his alternative?
Or sell this picture?
Or just break it and throw it away?
So is his alternative cost
of using photos, in addition
to selling you, zero?
He talks about himself in Turkish,
but he will say something like that.
Spartish sheep, though wool and cloth.
Know it in advance to make such a
fruit that you all behave like this.
He't have you photographed
at all, but when the photos
are already taken, his
alternative costs are zero.
All of its costs have
become irreversible costs.
You see, people in business often
catch each other on irreversible
costs.
Most often it is not ethical, but
in this case my conscience, I
think, is absolutely pure.
I did not ask him to take a photo of myself.
If I had a contract with him,
I would have promised him to pay
$3 for a photo, and then, when he
had all the costs, I would have
said that I don't have money,
here it would be probably not
ethical.
But in this case I did not ask him
and I do not think I did anything wrong.
Well, we looked at you, decommissioned
economic costs and non-refundable
costs.
Let us summarize this first
question.
What would be good
if you had a dry
rest?
What is Economics Studying?
Decisions made in society
about using limited
resources to
meet unlimited needs.
The main problem of the economy is the
problem of choice in the context
of limited resources.
When it is necessary to choose,
the concept of alternative or
economic costs arises.
The economic costs of receiving
a given good are those goods you
had to give up, or more precisely
the value of those goods
you had to give up if you made
a choice in favor of that
good.
If all costs are already incurred,
they become irreversible costs.
Well, and don't forget, of course,
that economic theory consists of
two disciplines – microeconomics and macroeconomics.
Well, let's go back to the
slide “Theme Questions.”
You see, two questions.
The first is economics as a science.
The second is the economic cycle.
Well, the first time I thought
“Hudo – poor” we watched you.
The second question is very interesting,
but I will leave it to you
for independent study.
In the text of the lecture he has
with Russian examples.
We are just a little limited
in time, we have a lot to do ahead.
Let us move to the second topic.
The second topic, please
see the slide, is called “The
Demand-Offer Model and Its
Use in Economic Analysis.”
This is a very important topic,
because the supply-demand model
is the most important, most
widely used model in the
microeconomics.
It explains how prices and volumes
of goods sold and purchased
in individual markets are formed.
Again, it can be a local market,
a national market, and even
a world market, but a
separate good.
How is the price formed?
The price, obviously, forms
depending on the supply and demand.
The first question is the demand
and its factors.
In the second question, we will stop with
you on the proposal.
The third is market balance.
We will connect supply and demand
together and see how
market price is formed.
Then we can talk a little about the practical
applications of the theory.
So look at.
Start the first question.
Demand and its factors.
The definition is very simple.
Please look at the slide.
It is in line with the usual
logic of life.
Logic to read.
Demand is the amount of goods
that all buyers can and want
to purchase during a given
time and under certain conditions.
Nothing difficult, I think there
is no.
Demand is how much good we want to buy.
The moment in time must be asked, the
time must be asked, and certain conditions
must be taken into account.
These factors are called
demand factors.
What are the main factors of demand?
Please look at the slide.
The first factor is the price of this product.
What is obvious.
Obviously, the demand for a product
depends on its price.
I think, I think everyone agrees.
The second factor is the price and the
number of products.
How to understand?
Well, let's look at the demand, let'
s say, on the giraffes.
What does it depend on?
It depends on the price of the jigsaw.
But it also depends on the prices of
the foreign marks of a similar class,
which are substitutes for the jigguls.
I hope you understand, no?
If foreign brands are cheaper, we will
most likely make a choice in favor
of foreign brands, while reducing
our demand for jigol.
The third factor is the price and the quantity
of supplementary products.
What products are complementary
to the giraffes?
Gasoline, service, garages, spare
parts, many things.
And when I decide whether
to buy or not to buy a jigolo,
I will think about what.
The price of the jiggles is undisputed, but
also about what I will cost the service
of the jiggles, that is, the price
of supplementary goods.
Demand for jiggles depends, again,
on the price and quantity of complementary
goods.
The third factor is income and
their distribution among different
groups of consumers.
But what is obvious?
If our income grows, then we will probably
not necessarily, but most likely
increase demand for jigol under
other equal conditions.
The third factor is the consumer habits and tastes.
It also has an impact on demand.
The number of consumers obviously
affects demand.
The more consumers live in our
city, the more demand for one
or another good in that city.
The preclimate conditions.
In my opinion, everyone understands that
in Africa the demand for shirt
will be small, and in the North a little more.
Expectations of consumers.
I will talk about expectations separately.
So, let's talk about the factors
of demand a little more in detail.
But stop, that moment I forgot.
Please look at all the
factors of demand.
How many there are there?
One, two, three, four, five,
six, seven, eight.
8 factors of demand.
And how you think, this is how you
think, what an important factor,
very important, obviously life-influencing
on demand, I will not mention.
Which factor do I not mention?
I have not said anything about the quality
of the product.
But don't rush, don't include quality
among the factors of demand.
That's why economists don't do that.
Because we are talking about the demand for
this product.
The demand for this product
implies the demand for the goods
of this quality.
The quality of the product
is initially considered.
If the quality changes, we consider
it as a different product,
though a very close substitute.
In other words, the 10th and 12th models
in microeconomics are
considered as different goods.
Moreover, even the jiggles of different
colors are also considered in the
microeconomy as different goods.
Of course not?
The quality of the product is
initially determined.
Therefore, it is not mentioned among the
factors of demand.
Now let's talk more specifically about the
The first factor, I repeat, which?
price of this product.
Let's see how the price of
this product affects demand for it.
It is very easy.
There is a so-called law of demand
in the microeconomy.
Let's see the next slide.
Here is its formulation.
The law of demand.
The lower the price of the product,
the more it is purchased during
the given time and under
other unchanged conditions.
The law of demand is graphically reflected.
Please look at the schedule, the
picture.
See, on the axis X we postpone the
quantity of goods.
I use an internationally accepted designation.
Quantity in English means
Q.
And by the axis Y we indicate,
we postpone the price of this product price.
And what do we see?
Look carefully at the picture.
I think it's easy, there's nothing here.
The lower the price of the product, the
more what?
The size of demand for it under
other, I repeat, unchanged conditions.
Only a small reservation.
I have drawn the linear function.
In fact, it can not necessarily
be linear.
It can also be non-linear.
It could be something like that, wrapped.
But this does not abolish the laws
of demand.
The linear function of demand is most
often used for simplification.
We looked at how it affects
demand.
The first factor is the price.
But there are seven other factors in addition
to the price.
Let us talk about them.
Look at the next slide.
Written by.
The impact of all other factors
on demand is manifested in the shift of
the demand curve, upwards to the right when
demand increases and downwards to the left
when it decreases.
Look at the schedule.
Let's say that the demand function is
initially set to D0.
Imagine that consumer income
has increased.
Nothing has changed anymore.
What does this mean?
That at any possible price people
will want to buy this product more
than before.
Where does the demand go?
to the right.
The reverse situation.
Consumer income has fallen.
What will we most likely face here?
That at any possible price people
will want to buy this product
less than before.
And the demand curve will move left down.
What was the factor?
The fourth, yes, the fourth factor.
Income of consumers.
What is the fifth factor?
Consumer habits and tastes.
I think it is obvious too.
Imagine such a situation.
Russian consumers suddenly
also loved Estonian products.
For example, the cream.
What will this lead to?
That the demand for cream, for Estonian cream
will decrease, and the demand curve
will shift to the left.
See, here is what is important to
keep in mind.
What I am saying to you now
seems to me conceptually very simple.
But it is very important to learn to
translate words into the language of graphics.
So, I said, if the Russians suddenly
discovered the harmful properties of
Estonian cream, then the demand for
cream will fall, and the curve will shift
to the left.
Well, I very hopefully, over
time, the Russians will all
get it out and understand that Estonian
cream is not so bad.
Moreover, it is very eaten.
What will it lead to?
That the demand for cream will increase
again at the same price of it.
So the demand curve will move to the right.
So, we haven't talked about expectations yet.
What are the expectations in the microeconomy?
First, the expectations
of price changes.
Imagine that consumers expect that
in the near future the desired
product will travel.
What are they doing today?
Most likely, today they will
buy more goods, there may
be a high demand for goods.
And demand will increase, accordingly, the
demand curve will shift to the right.
If consumers have other expectations,
they expect that soon this product
will be cheaper, then why
buy it today?
Today, demand for it will decrease under
other equal conditions, and the demand
curve will shift to the left.
By the way, it is often used
by some companies in their
advertising strategies.
How do you usually try to lure
buyers Don Stroy?
They usually say that today the prices are
the same, and from the first day
of the next month the apartments are rising.
So what do the company
executives want?
They are looking to increase demand
for apartments today.
Moving the demand curve to the right.
well well.
Let us now look at the second factor, about
which we have not talked yet.
What was the second factor, if you
remember?
The second factor was the price
and the number of products.
Let's see how demand, changes
in the price of imported
cars affect demand for jigsaw.
For some reason, imported
cars are expensive.
Please look at the slide on the
left chart.
On the left chart, the demand for imported
cars function.
The initial price, say, of
cars was P1, and wanted
to buy Q1 cars imported.
The car was priced at P2.
So, they want to
buy less imported cars.
The demand dropped to Q2.
But as imported cars are getting
more expensive, it means that
consumers at any cost of cars
want to buy more than before.
And the curve of demand for gypsy
has shifted, shifting to the right,
right up.
Something similar, by the way, we
observed immediately after
the financial crisis of 1998.
Remember what happened then.
The ruble has fallen sharply.
As a result, the ruble prices of foreign
marks increased.
For many consumers, foreign marks have
become inaccessible.
They switched, accordingly, to
what?
In the Jigsaw.
The bus temporarily solved its
sales problems.
Demand for jigsaw has increased.
The demand for giraffes has shifted to the right.
Now let's talk about how
complementary markets interact
with each other.
In relation to cars, the complementary
product is gasoline.
Suppose the cars were traveling.
What will this lead to?
Well, before cars were worth,
say, the price of some car
was P1, bought Q1 cars.
The cars now stand P2,
buy them Q2.
But by buying fewer cars, we, with
the rest equal, start to
spend, to present less demand
for gasoline.
The demand for gasoline is shifting
to the left.
The demand for gasoline is decreasing.
I think I have considered all the factors.
To conclude this question, here
is a very important comment.
Look at the next slide.
Economists distinguish between demand
and demand.
These concepts sound very similar, but they
are different concepts.
If the change in purchases of a given
product occurs under the influence of a
change in its own price, then they say
about a change in the amount of demand.
In this case, the demand curve does not
shift, but we are going as if on the
demand curve.
Return to the previous slide.
cars and gasoline.
What happened to the cars?
The cars traveled.
They are now buying less.
Previously, the price of P1 was purchased
Q1 cars, now the price of P2
is purchased Q2 cars.
Why are less cars purchased?
Because they traveled.
In this case, we say that the
demand for the car has changed.
And we are going on the demand curve from below up.
If the change in the purchase of goods
occurs under the influence of all other
factors, then they speak of the
change in demand itself.
And here is already a shift in the
demand curve.
Return to the previous slide.
Why buy less gasoline?
They imitate the car.
At the same price of gasoline,
they start to buy less.
Here, the demand for gasoline curve goes
to the left, and we say that the demand
has decreased, namely the demand for gasoline.
Not the size of demand, but the demand.
All, the first question we have finished with you.
Now let's talk about the second question.
The proposal and its factors.
The definition of supply is as simple
as the definition of demand.
We read.
The offer is the amount of goods
that all producers can and want
to produce and sell during
a given time and under certain
conditions.
Well, the same thing.
Demand is how much they want to buy,
and supply is how much they want
to produce and sell.
Now the proposal factors.
Let us look at them.
There are a lot of them here too.
The first factor is the price of this product.
The second is the profitability of
goods that are competitive to this
product in production.
I fear that this is not very clear,
but we will look at it on a specific example.
The third factor is not better.
The profitability of goods supplementing
this product in production, we will also
consider it on the example.
The fourth factor is the cost of producers.
The fifth factor is state taxes
and subsidies.
The sixth producer.
The Seventh Goal.
The 8th natural condition.
The ninth is the expectation of the producers.
Well let us.
We talked about the factors of
supply, now we talk about the
factors of demand.
The first factor of the offer is the price
of the product.
This is what economists call
the law of proposition.
Here it is, on the next slide.
The Law of Proposal.
The higher the price of the product,
the more the producers
want to sell during this
time and under other unchanged
conditions.
This law is contrary
to the law of demand.
How did the law of demand sound?
The lower the price, the more they want to buy.
What is the proposal law?
The higher the price, the more they want to sell.
We have graphically introduced this law.
Again, we are putting X on what?
quantity of goods.
But now it is no longer the size
of demand, but the size of supply.
And again, the price of the goods.
And what do we see?
The rising function.
The higher the price of the goods,
the more they want to produce and
sell.
Why is it so?
Let us look at this on a simple
conditional example.
Let us take a very conditional
example with you.
There are only three oil
fields in the world.
In each field, only one
barrel of oil can be extracted
under natural conditions.
No more can.
For the sake of simplicity, we introduce this.
This is the simplification.
But, obviously, every producer
would like to sell their oil
as expensive as possible.
At least for a million dollars.
Every manufacturer
has a minimum price.
If oil is cheaper than that price,
it will simply not be involved.
And the differences in these minimum
prices are due to differences in
the costs of oil production at different fields.
We have three oil fields.
The first field is conditionally in
the Middle East.
Suppose the minimum
price for the Arabs
is, suppose, $5 per barrel.
Minimum acceptable price for Arabs.
Next, the second oil field,
let's say, is located in Siberia.
There is a higher cost of mining.
And let's say that the
minimum price for a Russian
firm is $10 per barrel.
Once again, if the price is below
$10 a barrel, I believe that
oil production becomes
unprofitable and the Russians
stop oil production.
And finally, the third field,
let us find it in Norway,
on the shelf of the North Sea.
The minimum price for the
Norwegians is, say, $15
per barrel.
Once again, I want to emphasize
that only one barrel
of oil can be extracted
at each field.
Let us now reason.
Suppose the price, the market price of
oil, the price of oil, so has fallen,
fell less than $5 per barrel.
Under $5 per barrel fell.
How much oil will be produced?
Obviously, under such conditions, no
one will be involved in oil and the supply
of oil to the market will be zero.
And if the price reaches $5 per
barrel, I repeat again, $5 per
barrel is the minimum price
that is suitable for
the Arabs.
It no longer pleases anyone but
them.
So at $5 the price of oil
will be delivered to the
world market?
Only one barrel.
well well.
What if oil is on the way up and
the price is $10 per barrel?
Arabs more than the barrel
we assume to extract simply can not.
Who to connect?
The Siberian?
The Russian company began to extract oil.
$10 per barrel is the
price that is the minimum.
So how much of the barrel and oil will
be offered to the world market?
Two more Arabs and two more Russians.
How much oil will be available
in the world market?
Two barrels
well well.
And if the price reaches $15 per
barrel, who will connect?
The Norwegians.
They are already harvesting.
Three barrels in total.
They are producing their barrel.
And the supply of oil in the
world market is reaching what?
Three barrels
What will we and you get?
We can transfer this table, the data
of this table to the chart.
Here is look.
By axis X, the quantity of goods, oil
in our example.
by price of goods.
So at $5 per barrel, how
much do you get?
1 barrel is placed on the market.
At the price of 10 mines and offer
for sale 2 barrels.
At the price of 15 they offer for sale 3 barrels.
Having combined all these points, what
have we gotten?
Dependency of the amount of
oil offered on the world market
from the price of oil.
What did you and I get?
The supply of oil.
We indicate the proposal with the
letter C.
Why is?
and Sappled.
Well, there is a case when, say,
you ask a bad student for an
exam, you draw him a function, you
write the letter C and you ask
him, is this a demand or this a proposal?
He thinks that the letter C means demand
and says it is a function of demand.
And he gets two, not for ignorance of English.
In English, it means
supply.
And for ignoring that the demand
function simply cannot behave like this.
The ascending function is the function of the offer.
It is in accordance with the law of proposal.
The higher the price, the greater
the supply will be.
So why is it still up
this function?
Because with the rise of the
price, it becomes profitable
to produce goods where the cost
of the goods is higher.
Besides the price, there are many other factors.
Let us talk about them.
Let us see.
The next slide.
We read.
The effect of all other factors
on supply is manifested in
the shift of the supply curve
to the right down when the
supply increases and to the left
up when it decreases.
Let us try to figure it out.
What does the offer increase?
This means that at the same price
they want to offer more goods to
sell than before.
Well, let's say, before at the price
of $10 per barrel, how much was
offered to sell?
Two barrels of oil.
And now for some reason are
they selling at the same price
how much?
Not two, but, suppose three.
What does it get?
The proposition curve shifts to the
right, that is, when the proposition rises,
the proposition curve shifts
to the right down.
When the offer falls, what does
it mean that the offer falls?
This means that at the same price,
the goods are offered for sale
less than before.
For example, at the price
of $10 a barrel, two barrels of
oil were offered for sale.
For some reason, only
one barrel.
And what will happen?
Where does the curve offer go?
Left and up.
So again again.
When the supply increases,
the supply curve moves again.
Right and down.
When the offer is reduced,
the offer curve moves left and
up.
Let's see now, why can
this happen?
There among the factors of the proposition, the
fourth, in my opinion, the factor sounds like this.
Costs of producers.
Let us discuss.
Suppose for some reason, I don'
t know why, the cost of all
three fields increased by
$5 per barrel.
In our example, $5.
The next factor, the fifth, is
the fifth factor, state taxes
and subsidies.
How does it affect the proposals?
In fact, taxes are different.
We will take those taxes that
increase the costs of producers.
The taxes are the same cost.
When we impose a tax, the costs
of producers increase by size.
Taxes and supply curve go up.
The offer is reduced.
What is a Subsidy?
Taxation and the opposite.
When the state does not take money, it gives
it to the producers.
With the donation and cost, the
costs are reduced.
And the wrong proposal goes where?
down to the amount of the grant.
The natural conditions are not difficult.
Let's talk about the expectations of the manufacturers.
The expectations of producers.
Remember when we talked about
demand, also looking at expectations.
What were the expectations?
Expectations, changes, prices of goods.
well well.
Suppose, manufacturers all expect
their goods to travel soon.
How will they act today?
They will probably hold the goods.
Do not rush to sell.
And accordingly what?
The offer will decrease and the offer
curve will go to the left.
To the left, up.
The simplest example.
You are going to sell your apartment.
You expect that soon the apartments will still travel.
You will not be in a hurry
to sell your apartment.
If all do so, the supply of
apartments on the market will be less.
On the contrary, if everyone expects that
the apartments will soon be cheaper, what
will the manufacturers try to do?
The seller will try to sell their
apartments as soon as possible.
As a result, the supply of apartments
will increase.
Here is such an example.
Near the house where I live, from
the unforgettable times, a whole garage
town emerged.
There was a rumor that a new elite house
would be built in this place.
What are we watching?
On each column of the advertisement I sell a garage.
People expect that soon the garages will
be demolished, accordingly, they will be cheaper.
They are selling their garage.
The supply of garages is increasing.
Now let's look at the second and
third factors.
Here you can see the profitability
of goods that are competitive data
of production trade.
Let's talk about this factor.
Imagine two products in the market,
in the food market.
Carrots and, for example, potatoes.
The carrot has traveled.
How do you think this will affect
the potato supply?
Just look, to give the correct
answer, you need to stand in the
position of a farmer-producer.
Not in the consumer's position,
so we will not understand anything.
The position of the farmer.
What are farmers focusing on?
profitability of a good.
The carrot travelled.
So the profitability of carrots
for farmers increased on other
equal terms.
What does the farmer answer?
They increase the supply of carrots.
And in fact, before, look at the slide,
the carrots were P1 worth, the carrots
were offered on the Q1 market,
now the carrots are P2, and the carrots
are offered on the Q2 market.
So, with the rise of prices, farmers
increase the supply of carrots.
But the earth is limited.
I started this lecture.
The needs are limitless, and
the resources, including land, are limited.
But the earth is limited, what does that mean?
If farmers offer more carrots to the
market, they take the land out
of the potato and occupy that land
with carrots.
What do we mean watching?
We see that the potato
market is getting
smaller.
I repeat, carrots produce
more.
The soil is taken from the potato, given
under the carrots.
So the soil under the potatoes
is getting smaller.
And at the same price of potatoes,
the supply of potatoes decreases.
Look at Chart B, Chart B on the right.
The potato supply is shifting.
From S0 to S1 goes to
the left.
To understand this better,
let's look at another example.
Think for yourself.
Let us model this situation.
Economists are traveling.
What will happen to the proposal of the
tankers conditionally?
Well, an economist is the same commodity
as carrots, potatoes or jiggles.
So if we draw the curve proposal
of economists, what will we postpone
on the X axis?
Their number.
And on the axis Y, the price of the economist,
his salary.
We are seeing a rising curve.
How much did economists cost?
by P0?
How many people have chosen the
profession of economist?
K0 is
And the market was offered, the labour
market, to the economists at this
price, that is, at this salary.
Economists are traveling.
The price of the economist P1.
What are young people responding to?
A large number of young people, under
other equal conditions, are starting
to choose the profession of economist.
And after some time, the market's offer
of economists increases from
Q0 to Q1.
This is the wrong proposal of economists.
They are economists.
Now let's look at the tank market.
My logic here is very simple.
I come from what?
That if a young man chose the profession
of an economist, he will not go conditionally
to the tankman.
Does that mean we are watching?
At the same price of the economist
P0, the supply of economists
on the market will be smaller than
before.
So where will the curved offer go?
The left?
Now let me...
This is what I suggest you to think about.
to think.
The oil traveled.
What will happen to the supply
of natural gas?
Think of.
Oil has traveled.
What will it lead to?
That at higher prices of oil
it will be produced in those
fields that were previously unprofitable.
Oil supply will increase.
So they are no longer economists, they
are oil.
You see, the price of oil was
P0, conditionally $10 per barrel.
It produced 2 barrels of oil.
And at the price of P1 $ 15 per
barrel began to produce 3 barrels.
But very often, when oil is extracted,
natural gas is also
extracted.
So what will it lead to?
Will the supply of gas on the market increase?
That is, look, gas is a good that
complements oil in production.
What are we watching here?
Where will the gas supply
curve move?
to the right.
At the same price, they will
produce more gas simply because they
are producing more oil.
To end this question, let
us stop at this very
important moment.
Remember, I told you that you should
distinguish between the concept of demand and
the amount of demand.
Similarly, the concept of the offer
and the amount of the offer must be distinguished.
We read.
If you look at the slide, if the change
in sales of a given product occurs under
the influence of the change in
its price, then they say about the change
in the amount of the offer.
This is the movement along the
proposal curve.
Please look at.
Why is oil producing more?
Because oil has gone.
Therefore, we go on the proposal
curve from this point to this.
The curve proposal does not move here.
Oil increased, and the supply
of oil increased.
Read on further.
If the change in the sales of goods
occurs under the influence of all
other factors, then they say about
the change of their own offer.
And then there is a shift in the curve
of the proposal.
Look at the right schedule.
Oil is expensive, more is being extracted.
Here we are going on the curve.
At the same price, the gas
is offered to the market.
And we are seeing a shift in the
curve of gas supply.
In our example, right down.
The second question we have discussed with you.
We move to the third question.
The Third Question.
The market balance.
What is required here?
So far, you and I have looked at the
demand and the offer in isolation from
each other.
And now we have to combine
the function of supply and
demand in one picture.
This is how it is done in the slide.
Two curves of demand and offer.
Let us discuss.
Suppose the price was at P1 level
at the beginning.
P1 is
Look what we will observe.
You see, the price is high.
At this price, the demand is small.
What is it equal to the schedule?
Q1D
See you?
At the price of P1, the demand
value is Q1D.
At such a high price, few would
like to buy this product.
What do you think of the offer?
The price is high.
At this price, many would be happy
to produce and sell this product.
The value of the offer at the
price of P1 is Q1S.
So what do we observe?
At P1 the supply
exceeds the demand.
We are also seeing a market in the market.
Manufacturers want to sell more
goods than consumers agree to
buy at this price.
In this model, we are considering
the so-called fully
competitive market.
What is a completely competitive
market?
This is a market with a lot of
independent sellers and buyers.
No one controls the price.
The price on the market is set naturally
under the influence of the demand of thousands
of buyers and the supply of hundreds
of sellers.
But still at the P1 price, when
the sellers can't sell all
their goods, the price begins to fall.
Let's see now what happens if the market
price accidentally completely, suddenly
settles at the level of P2.
What do we see now with the P2 price?
The price is low.
At this price, many would be happy
to buy this product.
And the amount of demand for
the product is, look at the slide, Q2D.
The price is low for manufacturers.
At this price very few producers
would like to produce and
sell this product.
That is, at the P2 price, the Q2S product will
be offered to the market.
What are we watching now?
They want to sell, they want to,
sorry, buy more goods than they want
to sell.
What is the name of the difference?
Do you know that word?
Of course the Devi.
There is a deficit in the market.
And the price of the goods naturally begins to rise.
The next step, what are we watching?
Look carefully at the slide.
There is a price P
with a star, where the values
of supply and demand
coincide.
This price is called the equilibrium
price.
P is the equilibrium price.
The quantity of goods purchased
and sold at this price is
called the balance quantity.
Let's see how the balance
can change.
The next slide we call a balance
shift.
shift of balance.
Let us reason.
Suppose for some reason, people'
s income may have increased.
Demand for goods increased.
What are we observing as a result?
The demand curve moves upwards to the
right from position D0 to position D1.
At the same time, the cost of
the manufacturer is increasing.
What does it lead to?
That the supply of goods decreases
and the curve of supply moves where?
Left up.
What are we watching?
The demand curve moved to the right.
The curve proposal moved to the left.
And now they are crossing those
curves at another point.
What is happening in this regard?
The price of the goods must increase.
Both factors in this case, both the increase
in demand and the decrease in supply,
pull the price toward the increase.
The price of P1 was P0.
What happens to the equal number?
I have Q1 on the Q0 chart.
The balance amount remains
the same.
But it is not necessary.
Imagine that the demand function
has shifted more to the right
than the supply function
to the left.
But see what will happen?
In this case, the price will be
even higher and the balance amount will increase.
Imagine the reverse situation.
When the price, when the curve
of supply shifted to the left stronger
than the curve of demand to the right,
what will we now observe?
The price will again rise even more,
but the balance amount will now decrease.
The third question we have looked at.
The fourth question is quite large.
There are many practical applications of this theory.
Let us briefly discuss
some of the simplest applications.
In Russia, due to favorable
weather conditions, this year
a record grain harvest was
collected.
Please illustrate this situation
graphically.
I am convinced that the market
for grain in our country
is very competitive.
So, will it be what we have?
The number of grains on the axis X, the price
on the axis Y.
There are some functions, basic initial
functions, demand and offer,
I will designate them D0 and S0.
There is a certain equilibrium price P0
and a certain equilibrium quantity Q0.
Now the conditions.
I will repeat it again.
Due to favorable weather conditions,
this year record grain harvests
were collected in Russia.
What will change in the schedule, think.
Well, in fact, if a record grain harvest
is collected, it means the market is
overwhelmed with grain.
The supply of grain is increasing.
And when the grain supply
increases, where does the supply
curve go?
Right down and down.
What are we watching?
The price of grain is beginning to fall,
and it will be sold more on the market.
Note that in this case, for
now only the supply curve
is shifted, but not the demand
curve.
Because no factors affecting
demand have changed here.
Just the market is overwhelmed with grain,
grain more, grain price falls, and grain
is buying more, but we go here.
The supply curve moves, the demand
curve does not move, we go along
the demand curve.
Due to the price decline, consumers
are buying more grain.
Continue to analyze the situation.
Suppose that under such
conditions the Ministry of Agriculture
decides on additional
purchases of grain to the
state reserve.
What will be on schedule?
Think, it is not difficult.
Additional purchases of grain
in the state reserve.
If so, who will go to the
market?
A new major buyer in the person of the Minneapolis.
So what is increasing now?
The grain demand and demand curve
shift to the right to position D1.
What does the producer
of Minecraft do?
It tries to keep the price
below P0 to support
farmers.
Another thing is that when the Ministry of
Agriculture actually carried out such a
policy, farmers already sold their grain
and he really supported the buyers with
their grain purchases.
Another example.
The economies of India and China are seeing
rapid growth.
How will this affect the global
oil market?
Well again.
Look at the global oil market.
Is there anything here?
The quantity price.
There is an initial demand for oil in the
world market.
There is an initial oil offer.
There is a balanced price.
There is a balanced number.
What happens next?
The Chinese and Indian economies are growing rapidly.
How will this affect the global
oil market?
Well obviously.
Fast-growing economies need
more oil as a necessary
raw material.
So what is happening in the global market?
The oil demand curve is shifting to the right.
And we watch what?
Reduction of oil.
But the balance also grows.
If the oil supply curve
has such an upward tilt.
Another example.
The price of oil has risen sharply in
the world market.
How will this affect the foreign exchange market
in Russia?
I would like to point out that
the change in the world oil price is
a subsidiary condition.
We are studying the changes
in the currency market in our country.
What is sold and bought in the currency market?
The foreign currency.
For example, the US dollar.
So on the axis X we will postpone
the amount of dollars.
The dollar is a commodity like any other.
There is demand for dollars, there is its offer.
So, on the axis X, the amount of dollars.
The price of the dollar in rubles
is called.
The dollar course.
So there is something we have.
Initial dollar demand and
initial dollar supply.
Let us reason.
Oil has gone?
Russia exports oil.
So, the influx of foreign
currency, US dollars, to the Russian
market has increased.
What will we see?
The dollar offer is increasing.
And the curve of the dollar offer is shifting
to the right.
What happens to the dollar?
The dollar is getting cheaper.
This is actually happening in Russia.
Due to the large influx of dollars on the
Russian market, the dollar is cheaper.
And now let's assume that the Bank
of Russia, the Central Bank, does
not want the dollar to cheaper.
What to do him?
He wants the dollar to remain
the same, P0.
What to do with the central bank?
It should increase the demand for dollars.
He starts buying dollars.
What are we watching?
On the one hand, the supply of dollars is growing,
on the other hand, the demand for dollars
is growing.
This could lead to the dollar
price remaining.
The dollar rate remains the same.
Or maybe it will fall a little if the
Central Bank's demand increases by
a smaller amount.
Suppose it will be.
What we are actually watching now.
And to finish this question and at the
same time this topic, we need to understand
that this model, it describes
the various market situations well.
But it is actually nothing more
than a tool like a hammer.
This tool must be used.
In order to correctly predict the
consequences of the changes in
demand and supply in the real market,
it is necessary to understand that
the functions of demand and
supply are not always so standard,
so classic.
See what a realistic look of the proposal
function is.
Demand for proposal.
Sooner or later, the function
of the proposition moves to the vertical.
See here.
Remember, I assumed that we only
have three oil fields in the world
market.
And, suppose, the price
set at $15 per barrel.
Remember our example?
Three barrels of oil are
bought and sold.
But the fourth field simply does
not exist.
So, the fourth barrel of oil
just got nonewhere until new
fields were opened.
So what is the
curve proposal?
This is such.
It goes vertical.
If so, what will increase
demand for oil?
Only the price of oil.
The balance of oil on the global
market will remain the same.
Just the same.
And the demand curve may not
be quite standard.
Well, the standard type of demand curve, here
it is.
And if it doesn't give you God and I
insulin too, what depends on the
demand for insulin?
The number of patients, right?
Well, the prices depend slightly,
at least within a certain
price range.
And if this is the case, then the curve
of demand for insulin at a certain price
of insulin will not buy less, this must
be taken into account.
This is insulin, a commodity that is
not easy to replace.
There is a product that is easy
to replace, and it is easy to refuse.
Beer of this brand.
What is the role of beer demand?
Not for beer at all, but
for beer of this brand.
Goods are easily replaced.
So, with a slight increase in the
price of beer for this, for this
type of beer, it is for
it, consumers can easily switch
to another type of beer.
So what is the demand function?
Very sexually.
This is what I repeat again
to better predict the
effects of the change in supply
and demand in the same market.
We need to see what the
real functions of supply
and demand will look like.
They are not always standard.
They can be both vertical
and horizontal.
I repeat again.
More detailed theory.
These are described in the text of the lectures.
You can get acquainted with them.
The second topic will end with you.
We move on to a new topic.
Production and costs.
Please see the topic
slide.
My first question is with you.
The production function.
What is it?
First, the definition of production
is very simple.
Production is any human
activity to transform
limited resources of any
kind, material, labor,
natural, finished products.
So what is the idea?
To produce something, we need resources.
And the production function shows
the relationship between what?
Between the amount of
resources used and
the maximum output
output volume that can
be achieved provided
that all available resources
are used fully
and most efficiently.
The housewife is baking cakes.
Within an hour, say, she can
bake, if she works normally,
not unworking, but better
organized her work, she can
afford to bake 10 cakes.
So if we indicate the quantity of
the household labor by L labor, labor,
and production by Q quantity,
then the elementary production
function is like that.
Q is multiplied by L.
I hope you can see that this
feature shows how the output varies
depending on the amount of work
used by the housewife, provided,
I repeat, that her work has
been organized optimally
and works with normal intensity.
This is the simplest
production function.
More complex functions are used
in economics.
Here, please, the most commonly
used in economic theory is
the two-factor production function,
which reflects the dependence
of output on the amount
of labour and capital used.
Labor is L, capital
is K.
Q is equal to A multiplied
by K in alpha, multiplied
by L in beta.
So K and L is the amount
of labor and capital used.
I just want to clarify.
We measure labor in human hours, and by
capital we understand not the sum
of money, we invest it in business,
but what is called in the economic
theory physical capital, that
is, the means of production,
machines, machines and equipment.
Thus, the amount of capital we measure
usually in machine-hours.
And again, alpha and beta are
already known parameters.
And if we know them, it is
enough for us to submit the quantities
of labour and capital that
can change, and we can get the
corresponding quantity of release.
I repeat again, that is achievable
on the condition that both labor
and capital are used in the most rational way.
What do these parameters mean?
Start with the parameter A.
Please imagine that the
quantities of capital and labor
are given, and the parameter A
changes.
What does this mean?
In the same case, with the same quantities
of capital and labor, we can
get a larger volume of production.
So, parameter A reflects the
impact of technical progress on
the production function.
What do parameters A and B say?
A and B are the so-called coefficients
of elasticity of output on labor
and capital.
What does this mean?
Coefficient A shows how
much the output changes
by 1% when the capital changes
by 1%.
Accordingly, coefficient B shows
how many percent of the output
can be changed when the
change of only one percent of labor.
Knowing the production function, we
can measure the yield from scale.
Read the definition on the next
slide of scale yield.
The yield of scale shows how many times
the output increases with the simultaneous
increase of all factors of
production, that is, all
resources n times.
To produce something, we need resources.
Let's say we use two factors:
labor and capital.
Suppose we and you have doubled
the amount of labor and capital,
that is, built a two-fold
factory.
This means that we use twice
as much capital, twice
as much machines, and
twice as much labor.
What about production?
Production will grow, but not the
fact that it will double.
Possibly three cases.
The first case.
We double the number of factors
and the output triples.
In this case, we say that there
is an increasing return from the post office.
The second case.
We increase output, we increase all
factors, sorry, n times, that is,
labor, if capital has increased
n times twice, in my example,
and output increases
less than n times, for example,
one and a half times.
Then we say that there is a decreasing
return on scale.
And the third case.
We increased both factors, all
factors increased n times twice
in my example, and the output
increased also n times, too
twice.
Then we say that there is a
constant return on scale.
The nature of the return on scale,
it plays a very important role in
determining the optimal size of the enterprise.
Let me say, the giraffes.
They can be collected in a small workshop.
Maybe of course.
The car, as a production complex,
in terms of labor and capital, we
may suppose, is a hundred times greater
than such a small workshop.
That is, it uses a hundred times more
of the factors of production.
And the output of the car car
is increased by 200 or 300 times.
What does that mean?
As a car, assembling cars in a large
factory is more effective than in
a small workshop.
So if the return on scale increases,
what do we have?
Increase the size of the enterprise.
Another example.
In Soviet times, they were
very interested in building
giant enterprises, including
in agriculture.
They built, for example, giant pig
farms for thousands or even tens
of thousands of cattle.
Not only that the whole ecology flew within
a radius of 100 kilometers.
Here is what was.
For example, a giant pig farm
uses a hundred times more factor
production than a small farm.
And the meat production
in her is, let's say, only ten
times more.
What does that mean?
That large enterprises in agriculture
are economically inefficient.
This is why small farms
are quite effective in agriculture.
And when we increase the size of the
enterprise, we sooner or later come
to a situation in which the increasing
return on scale is replaced
by a constant, and then decreasing.
This means that it is not worth strengthening
the company.
It is better to enjoy a large
number of, but a smaller
size.
Knowing the production function, we
can always calculate the cost of the company.
Here we move to the second question.
Economists divide costs into
accounting and economic.
Definition of accounting costs.
Please look at the slide.
Accounting costs of a company are
the amount of actual payments purchased
by resources.
Well, that is very easy.
To produce something, a company
needs a variety of resources.
This company purchases.
A accountant then summarizes all these
payments purchased by resources
and enters them into its accounting
report.
Let us look at the simplest
example.
example of accounting costs.
Suppose the company uses equipment
worth 200 rubles and a service
life, say, 5 years.
The entire cost of the equipment
cannot be attributed to the
cost of one year.
We need to use amortization.
When using the simplest linear
depreciation, the cost of one
year will be attributed, respectively,
200, divided by 5, 40
rubles.
The accountant makes its report.
The amortisation is 40 rubles.
Further, let's say, a firm uses an
annual accountant writing 80 raw materials
and paying a firm, let's say, 60
rubles of salary per year.
The accountant says, salary 60.
Now let's say that
the equipment is 20 rubles.
The annual loan
rate is 20 rubles.
The loan fee is 20 rubles.
Suppose that no more payments are
made by the company.
Well, it does not incur administrative,
transportation, advertising, research,
does not pay taxes and is not
attributable to cost.
Nothing of that.
The accountant summarizes all these
payments and writes.
The accounting costs amounted
to 200 rubles.
The economist has a little of his own view.
Alternative costs are
economic costs.
They represent the value of
the goods that could be obtained
by the most profitable of
all alternative ways of
using limited resources.
I am afraid it is not very clear, but it can be easier.
In practical calculations,
economic costs include, in addition
to the explicit or accounting
costs, also the implicit
costs.
Can we write that economic
costs are equal to what?
Accounting costs plus some other
unclear costs.
What is accounting costs?
I have already said.
It is not clear what implicit costs are.
We read.
The implicit costs are the
amount of incomes of the
company on its own resources.
It is about the income that the
management of the company could
get by using its resources not in
this business, but somehow differently.
Let us find out.
Imagine that you have started your own
business.
You come into this business not
with empty hands.
What did you bring with you?
Maybe a lot of
money.
Let's say 100 rubles.
Could you use this
capital as an alternative?
Of course could.
What is the easiest way
to use that money?
You could put them in the bank.
You would get a percentage.
If you invest that money in your
own company, you have lost that percentage.
And this unreceived percentage will
enter the firm's implicit costs.
Well, let's say you invested 100
rubles in your business.
You had to close your
bank account.
You have lost 10% of your invested
money.
I for simplicity assume that the
bank pays on deposits also 10%.
So, the implicit cost that these
funds you got as if free, but
that does not mean that their
use should be taken into account.
So you invested 100 rubles,
lost 10% on those funds, which
you could get if you kept that
money in the bank.
And accordingly, in the implicit
costs will include this unreceived
percentage of 10 rubles.
and further.
In order to start your business,
you had to leave your job.
You probably worked for hiring before.
So you lost?
The wage.
Unreceived wages will also be included
in the firm's implicit costs.
Let's say, by hiring, you
earned 200 rubles.
When you start your business, you lose
those 200 rubles.
These 200 rubles of unreceived
salary economists include in the implicit
costs of your company.
I write.
Unpaid salary.
How many were there?
20 rubles, I would say.
Unpaid salary.
Another assumption.
Suppose for your business, you have turned
your apartment into an office or a
warehouse.
What did you lose in this case?
How do you estimate your losses?
You could provide this apartment
for your business, you lost
those 20 rubles.
So, the unreceived rent is
also legally included in the implicit
costs.
Unreceived rent is 20 rubles.
Well well well.
Summarizing all these lost income,
we get the implicit costs of the company.
We got 50 rubles.
It turns out that the total
economic costs of the company
are accounting costs of 200, implicit
costs of 50, and that 250
rubles.
But now we have to answer the most
important question.
Why are economists original?
For what reason they have invented
in addition to the explicit
or accounting costs, which are
obvious to all, some implicit
costs, which, I will repeat,
the firm does not even pay anyone.
The implicit costs are those income that
entrepreneurs have lost by investing their
resources in the company, which they have provided
to the company, supposedly free of charge.
Here is why.
Without knowing the implicit
costs, we cannot estimate how
profitable a business is.
I have already said about the costs.
The total economic costs amounted
to 250 rubles, but after all,
the firm produces something
and, suppose, produces, sells
products and, suppose, the
annual revenue of the
firm is, suppose, 240 rubles.
How to assess the accountant situation?
The accountant only takes account
of the accounting costs.
Not because he is so stupid,
but because the accountant guides
certain rules of
accounting.
The accountant will most likely congratulate
you on the profit.
Revenue 240, accounting expenses 200.
The profit was 40 rubles.
How do you assess the situation of an economist?
The economist is losing.
Revenue minus economic costs.
It was minus 10.
Loss of 10 rubles.
What does this mean in the mouth of an economist?
And very simple.
No one has pulled you into this business.
If you didn't go, how much money
would you have in your wallet
at the end of the year?
You would keep your money in the bank.
You would have a annual interest rate of 10 rubles.
They would hire themselves.
Annual salary is 20 rubles.
The apartment could be rented.
The rent would be paid 20 rubles
per year.
You would have 50 rubles
in your pocket.
How much do you have in your pocket
for the year?
Only 40 rubles of accounting profit.
Profit for 240.
Accountant with 200.
So you have taxes in your
pocket.
I don't take, of course.
40 rubles
So you just do not have a profitable
business under these conditions.
Now let us summarize.
Look at the slide.
The difference between revenue
and accounting costs is
the accounting profit of the company.
We have counted.
Revenue minus accounting
costs and accounting profit.
The difference between revenue
and economic costs is the
economic profit or surplus profit
of the company.
This is the economic profit,
the revenue minus the
economic costs.
And the third conclusion we can make.
If the profit is negative,
the company has a loss.
Business is not beneficial to entrepreneurs.
Whatever the amount
of accounting.
To conclude this question,
a few examples.
The first example I will give immediately.
I invented it.
Don't think that we are in the
department really doing this.
I know that in a week
on a business trip I
will earn, suppose,
100 rubles.
What are those 100 rubles in my examples?
100 rubles is my income.
That's what I get on a trip.
But, as I have, I work at
the Academy of Foreign Trade.
I have to give you some lessons
every week.
I just cannot leave like that.
The class will be broken, there will be a scandal.
What to do?
I will go to my colleague and say,
listen, I really need to leave,
take classes, I am uncomfortable to ask him.
So I will tell him so, take classes
for me, I will pay you
50 rubles.
There will be no scandal.
Administration and it is important that
the course is carried out.
Who will spend?
This is the second question.
So I pay a colleague to
travel without problems
50 rubles.
What are those 50 rubles in our terms?
That's what I take out of my pocket
and pay to my colleague.
These are my accounting costs.
Well, it would seem that everything is okay.
It is clearly beneficial to go on a trip.
After all, I will earn 100 rubles on
a business trip, and I will pay, I
will bear the cost to go on
a business trip 50 rubles.
My accounting income is
50 rubles.
But for the sake of simplicity,
I do not consider any other
accounting costs related to the
trip.
But there is one nuance.
Because of the fact that I am going
on a business trip, I will not be able to read
a lecture on the MBA program.
No one will make excuses for me here.
But I will not get a salary.
Suppose I am paid 60 rubles for
the MBA program.
If I go on a business trip, I don't
make those 60 rubles.
The total cost
of the trip
was 110 rubles.
50 plus 60
The revenue on the trip is only 100.
The economic approximation
of the trip is minus
10.
Travelling is unprofitable.
Another example.
Suppose you have a small cafe.
You have decided to set in the
corner a small or accounting
cost on this project.
Well, obviously, the annual depreciation
of the machine and the cost of its annual maintenance.
What will be included in the implicit cost of the machine?
I assume that there is no
free space in your cafe.
Therefore, if you installed the machine
in this corner, you will have to remove
the table.
Well let's suppose.
Accordingly, lost profit from the table
will enter the implicit cost
of the machine.
You cannot ignore the implicit costs,
otherwise you can't understand
how profitable or unprofitable
it is to install the machine.
Another last example.
My friend was doing this
business, maybe now.
It is an intermediary between the mayonnaise
plant and the shopping points.
She took mayonnaise at the
factory for sale, and then
arranged it for retail.
One day she had
trouble.
The owner of the container in the
wholesale refused to buy mayonnaise
from her, explaining that mayonnaise
is slowly selling.
She to me.
With this question, Sergey
Georgievich, and what about it fast
or slow?
After all, I, she says to me, I don't
take money from him, I give him mayonnaise
for implementation.
Sold quickly?
Compare with me quickly.
Selling slowly?
Compare with me slowly.
What does she not understand?
It does not understand that the owner of
the container has also implicit costs.
What are they composed of?
The container is not rubber.
If mayonnaise is in this corner,
there will not be, for example,
the same Estonian cream, which,
suppose, sells faster.
So what does it work out?
Loss of profit from the sale of cream
will be included in the implicit cost
of mayonnaise.
It turns out that the ordinary trader
in the market, having no notion of these
scientific terms of obvious and implicit
costs, cannot fail to take
into account implicit costs in
his practical activity.
We start with the third question, the types of costs.
All costs, both accounting and
complete economic, can be divided
into constant and variable.
What is at the basis of this division?
See here.
The company is increasing the production.
And it is evident that with the increase of
output, some costs change, while
others remain unchanged.
The costs that do not change with
the increase in output are
called fixed costs.
The costs that change with the
increase in output are called
variable costs.
Why are costs divided into constant
and variable?
Because we also divide the factors of
production into constant and variable.
The fact is that some factors
of production can be changed easily
and quickly with an increase
in output.
To increase the issue.
Well, let's say, it's quite easy to hire
new employees in the company.
Workers are a variable factor
of production.
But the company takes a certain
amount of time to purchase
new equipment, that is, to use
additional capital.
Therefore, we usually refer equipment
to a constant factor of production
in a short period of time.
Look at the definition again on the
slide.
Fixed costs are costs that
do not change with the
change in output.
This is the cost of constant factors
of production.
Usually, the fixed costs
include depreciation, rent,
interest on the loan,
and management salary.
Unclear costs are also
usually fixed.
Now the variable costs again.
Variable costs are costs whose
value changes with the change
in output.
This is the cost of variable factors
of production.
These usually include wages in workers'
production, raw materials and
materials costs, electricity
for technological purposes
and others.
Fixed costs and variable
costs.
If we summarize them, we
get the total cost.
Please look at the slide.
FC is fixed cost.
VC is variable cost, variable
cost.
The total cost is TC.
Total costs of the company.
It is also important to know
the unit cost or average cost.
The average constant cost is indicated
by the letter AFC.
Look at the slide.
These are fixed costs
per unit of production.
AFC is equal to FC constant
cost divided
by Q.
Average variable cost, AVC,
is the variable cost
per unit of production.
How to count them?
We divide the total amount of variable costs
by the volume of production.
Look at the formula.
And finally, the average
total cost is the total cost
per unit of production.
How to calculate?
Total cost, TC, can
be divided by
Q.
Or else can be counted.
Average constant and variable
costs can be summed up.
A very important role in economic
analysis is played by marginal
cost.
Limit costs are the increase
in total costs when the output
increases by one unit.
Look at the formula.
mc is equal to delta TC divided by
delta Q.
How to understand?
Let's say, you have already
produced a few units.
You want to produce another
additional product.
Another additional product.
To produce an additional unit
of products, additional costs
must be incurred.
These additional costs, which
will be required by the production
of an additional unit of product,
are the limit costs.
But look when we increase
the issue?
When will the total cost increase?
The total costs are consisting
of fixed and variable costs.
Only variable costs increase.
Fixed costs are not changed over
a short period of time.
The increase in total costs is
equal to the increase in variable costs.
Thus, the limit costs can be calculated
by dividing the delta of the growth
of variable costs, divided by the
delta of the production.
To understand this, I give
an example of calculating
the cost.
Please look at the slide.
There are two types of editions, 10 and 11.
What are the constant costs?
50 all the time.
They do not change with the
change of the output to determine
the fixed cost.
Which are changing?
The variables change.
Suppose that 10 was
100 rubles, and
11 was 105 rubles.
All other parameters are easily calculated.
What is the total cost?
How many were they at the 10th
edition?
50 plus 100, that is 150.
They are now in the issue 11.
50 plus 105 – 155.
Average constant, how to calculate?
very easy.
We divide the constant cost by the volume
of the issue.
50 divided by 10 is 5.
5 rubles of fixed costs per unit
of release at issue 10.
11 What will we expect?
50 divided by 11.
It is approximately 4.55.
This is the average constant cost of the
new volume of production.
Average variable costs.
Variable costs for the issue.
How many were?
100 to 10, 10 became 105 to 11, 9 and 55.
Finally, the average total cost.
How can I calculate?
The total cost can be divided by the volume
of the issue.
Average constant and average
variable costs can be
summed up.
So, before they were how much?
5 plus 10, 15 average total costs.
Now they are 4, 55, 4 and 55
plus 9.
14 and 1.
The last column contains the
limit costs.
Limit costs are just one
value here.
Limit costs are the increase
in total costs when production
increases by one unit.
Increase in output 1, Increase
in total costs 5.
5 for 1 is 5.
The maximum cost
is 5 rubles.
This is an additional cost that
will have to be borne if we increase
the output from 10 to 11.
I would like to point out that
the limit costs can also be calculated
by dividing the increase in variable
costs by the increase in output.
5 divided by 1 equals 5.
Now, we go to the fourth issue of
our topic.
Costs in the short term.
A short period in microeconomics
is a period during
which some factors
of production cannot be
changed and others can
be changed.
Capital is considered to be a constant
factor of production, and labour is
considered to be a variable factor.
Accordingly, capital costs in the
short period are fixed costs,
and labor costs in the short
period are variable costs.
Let's see what the costs
can be in the short term.
Let's start with the constant cost.
Look at the slide again.
Fixed costs are those costs
that do not change with the change
in the volume of the output.
See also.
The issue changes on the left chart,
and the fixed costs do not change.
Accordingly, the function of constant costs
is a straight line of the
parallel axis x.
Now let's talk about the function of average
constant costs.
What are the average constant costs?
We have already talked about it.
They are obtained by dividing the constant cost
by the volume of production.
The constant cost number does not change,
and the volume of production denominator
changes.
Set any amount of constant cost.
Let us suppose 10.
Let the output be equal to one.
What is the average constant cost?
10 divided by 1 equals 10.
Let us say that the output is equal to 2.
The constant is not changing, and the average
constant is how much?
10 divided by 2 ridiculous?
5 is
Let the release be equal to 5.
Average constant 10 divided by 5 is equal
to 2?
Let the output be equal to 10.
10 divided by 10 equals 1.
And the issue is very big.
Average constant costs.
10 for a very large value will
be a very small value.
Accordingly, with the growth of output,
the average constant cost
tends to zero.
And in general, the function
of average constant costs represents
a parable that is visible on the
right chart.
How are they changing?
What will be the functions of other costs?
Here, there is no unambiguous answer.
It all depends on the accepted conditions.
Let us first consider the simplified
cost functions.
They are based on the assumption that
the limit costs are constant.
What does it mean that the limit costs are constant?
This means that with the increase of
output, the costs increase all the time
by the same amount.
Take the example of trade.
Let us have a shop
that sells beer.
For trade, the volume of release
is the number of goods sold,
i.e. the bottles of beer sold.
What costs are usually
variable?
To sell beer, it must be purchased
from a wholesaler.
The more beer we sell, the
more beer we have to buy.
Accordingly, the cost of purchasing beer grows
with the volume of sales, that is, it grows
with the volume of production.
Therefore, for trade, the purchase
costs are variable.
All other costs are considered
constant in trade.
Those that do not change with the increase of the release.
The rental fee does not change,
the electricity costs do
not change.
If no one has bought anything from
us, the rent must be paid, the store
is running, the refrigerators are
working, the store is illuminated.
The salary of the seller will also be considered
independent of the volume of the
issue, that is, we will also be
considered as a constant cost.
Look at the table.
My output varies from 0 to 100.
The number of bottles sold
varies from 0 to 100.
The fixed cost is set
at 100 rubles.
They are not dependent on the release.
The variable cost is the
cost of buying beer.
Suppose that each bottle of beer is
purchased for 5 rubles.
If we have not bought a bottle
of beer and sold a bottle of
beer, the variable cost
is zero.
If we bought and sold one bottle
of beer, the variable cost is equal
to the cost of purchasing that
bottle, that is, 5 rubles.
We bought and sold 2 bottles of
beer, the variable cost is 10 rubles
and so on, 15, 20, 25 and
so on and so on.
So, variable costs are constantly
increasing by how much?
With each next day of release for
5 rubles.
These are additional costs
or limit costs.
See, fifth column, the limit
costs, all the time 5, 5,
5, 5.
How much is the total cost?
With zero-issue, variable costs
are zero, but constant costs
still have to be borne.
The total cost is
100 rubles.
When issuing 1 constant 100,
variable 5, only 105 and so on.
By known formulas, we can calculate
the average constant and average
variable costs, as well as
the average aggregate costs.
This is what I want to draw your attention to.
Limit costs are constant.
With each next unit of product,
the limit costs increase
all the time by the same
amount, by 5 rubles.
In this case, they are equal
to the average variable cost.
Well, in fact, if we have a output
other than one, variable costs
how much do we have?
5 is
With the release of 2 units, the variable
cost is 10.
With 3 units 15, with 4 - 20, with
5 - 25.
The average variable cost is always
equal to 5.
The average variable cost, in my conditional
example, is exactly the purchase
price of a bottle of beer.
This is reflected in the next slide.
See also.
On axis X we have the output, and on axis
Y - the marginal and average variable costs.
The limit costs remain the same with
the increase in output.
And they are necessarily equal in this
case to the average variable costs.
Now look at how the variable
and aggregate cost functions go.
I have already mentioned the permanent.
The function of constant costs goes parallel
to the X axis.
Let us return to our table.
Look at how the variable costs change.
When the issue 0 is 0; when the issue
1 is 5, when the issue 2 is 10, and so on.
Variable cost function is a linear function
that starts from the beginning
of coordinates.
This is shown in the chart.
How will the total cost function go?
See, at issue 0 the variable
costs, as we have already said,
are equal to 0.
But constant costs are not equal to 0
because they must be borne at any volume
of release.
In the case of zero-issue, the
total cost is equal to the constant.
Then the total cost function.
It is a linear function, a parallel
function, going parallel to the
variable cost function.
The difference between total
and variable costs is
the fixed cost.
This amount does not change.
These two functions go parallel
to each other.
Let us now look at the average
cost function.
Remember the formula.
What is the average total cost?
These are the average constant costs
plus the average variable costs.
What do we know about average cost?
With the increase of the output, they decrease
and aim to zero.
What do we know about the average
variable cost?
In this model, they do not change,
they are a constant value.
But if this foldable diminishes
and tends to zero, and the
second foldable is a constant, then
what does the sum seek?
The amount is aimed at the average
variable cost.
This is shown in the chart.
The higher the output, the lower
the average total cost, which,
however, is not aimed at zero,
but is aimed at average
variable costs.
What...
So, we can make a conclusion.
The larger the output, the less
the average total...
Average constant and corresponding
total costs.
A simple question.
Let's say you are studying economics as
part of an MBA program.
You study economics as a group.
Apply this last conclusion
that I just made in my
group.
Not very difficult.
What is an MBA issue for the school?
The number of listeners, right?
What are we watching?
The more students in a group,
the less the cost of training
for one student.
So, we have considered simplified
cost functions.
Such functions are usually consistent with
the practice of small.
But very often in business
you have to face the same
complex cost functions.
Here is another premise.
Limit costs first decrease,
then reach a minimum, and then
begin to increase.
Look at the slide.
How to understand?
At first, with the growth of production,
each additional unit of product
requires less and less additional costs.
Then these additional costs
become minimal.
After that, each additional unit
of release requires increasing
additional costs.
As soon as this is the case, all cost
functions change.
Please look at a conditional example.
The next slide.
Here, the output in the first
column varies from zero to ten.
The fixed cost by definition
should not change.
They are always 25, 25, 25.
Variable costs are changing.
How they change?
You will see in the table.
All other indicators can be calculated.
As always, the total cost is obtained
by summing up the fixed
costs and the variable costs.
have counted?
See you?
Let's see how the limit
cost function changes.
How can we calculate the
limit costs?
We take the increase in total costs
and divide it by the increase in production.
Increased release all the time of the unit.
What is the total cost increase
first?
55 minus 25 how much is it?
First of 30.
Then the total cost increases
24, then 20 and so on.
What we see means that when issued
from zero to five, the limit costs
are constantly decreasing, eventually
reaching a value of 16.
After that, starting with issue
6 and so on, the limit costs
begin to rise.
The average and fixed costs are always
decreasing.
There is nothing new here.
The functions of the average variable
and average total costs change
immediately.
Look what they will be now.
Here is the slide.
Limit and average costs.
Look at what happens with
the limit costs.
As I said, first they decrease,
then they reach the minimum, then
they begin to strive, then they increase.
What happens to the average
variable cost?
They first fall.
But they are declining, as you
can see, slower than the limit costs.
Then look at.
Within a certain period of time, the
limit costs are already increasing.
And the average variable costs,
look carefully, they are still decreasing.
And note that the average variable
costs decrease until they
are even above the limit costs.
Hence the most important conclusion.
The average variable cost
reaches its minimum at
the point where it is equal to
the limit cost.
Finally, let's look at the average
total cost function.
This function comes out of infinity.
For an infinite small quantity,
the average total cost is very large
because the output is very small.
Next What?
They decline and also necessarily
reach their minimum at the point where
they are equal to the limit costs.
The function of the limit costs necessarily
crosses the functions of the average
variable and the average total
cost at the points of their minimum.
Once the minimum point is
passed, the average total
cost begins to rise.
As they increase, they are constantly
approaching the function of
average variable costs.
Think, why is it so?
The average total cost is equal
to what we have already mentioned,
the average constant cost, plus
the average variable cost.
What are the average constant
costs?
to zero.
I have said this many times.
The average variable cost
is the average total cost.
Well, this is actually all about
the fourth issue of this topic –
the cost in the short term.
There is another fifth issue on the subject
– the costs in the long term.
There will be nothing new there,
except that I just want
to emphasize that there
are no constant costs in
the long run.
All costs are variable.
Why is?
Because in the long run, the company
can change all the factors of production.
She can find additional
workers, she can install additional
equipment, she can rent
a more spacious
building.
All factors of production
become variable, so all
costs also become variable.
There is no function of average
constant cost.
Is there only a function?
The function of the limit costs is the function
of the average cost.
And it will be the same.
The function of the limit costs first
decreases, then reaches a minimum,
then begins to increase.
The average total cost function first
decreases, then reaches the minimum
at the point of intersection
with the limit cost function.
After that, the average total
cost function begins to increase.
Let us start with the fourth topic
of our course.
Market Structures and Company Behavior.
Here we will talk about how the company
operates in certain market
conditions.
And it is probably obvious
that the behavior of a company depends
not only on the amount of
resources it has, but also on the
market environment in which it operates.
In other words, the behavior of the company
depends on the type of market.
Please look at the slide.
The first question we will discuss
with you is called “types of
market structures”.
Or it will be about types of markets.
Please see, there is...
Microeconomics distinguishes four types
of market structures or forms of market
organization.
This is perfect competition,
monopoly, oligopoly,
monopolistic competition.
Let's start with perfect competition.
Well, very often perfect
competition is misunderstood.
They think that perfect
competition is something like
absolutely harsh, ruthless
competition.
Actually nothing like that.
The definition is very simple.
Perfect competition is a market
structure in which there are
so many sellers and buyers that
none of them can influence the
market price by changing
the volume of their
supply or demand.
The price of a product in a completely
competitive market is determined by
the interaction of thousands of independent
buyers and hundreds of independent sellers.
Every buyer and every seller
is a piece of sand on the scale
of the market, which can not change
anything in the market by
its behavior.
Let's look at the signs of
perfect competition.
Well, I actually said about the
first sign.
Here is a sign.
Each of the very large numbers
of sellers and buyers has such a
small market share that they cannot
change the market price by their
behavior, but can sell or buy
as many products as they want
at that price.
Let me give you an example, I think it
will be appropriate.
Here is a friend who lives
in the Volgograd province, calls me in
Moscow and asks what tomatoes in
Moscow are for?
The case was in the summer and not last
year, I don't remember what I answered,
well, let's say, 10 rubles per kilogram.
She had an unfettered curiosity.
She was going to bring a truck
with Volga tomatoes to Moscow.
So, what did she come from, having
received my information, the price
of tomatoes in Moscow 10 rubles per kilogram?
It was based on the fact that
if today the price is so, its appearance
or not appearance on the
market can not affect the price.
But on the other hand, she is confident
that since she holds a tiny
share of the tomato market, she
will be able to sell any quantity
of her tomatoes at this price,
10 rubles per kilogram.
That is, and a ton, and three, and even
five, and more, she just has no.
It is clear that if she brought to
Moscow at the same time, say,
thousands of tons of tomatoes, then
such a large seller would necessarily
influence the market price.
But that would no longer be a condition
for perfect competition.
Under perfect competition, market
price is determined by the interaction
of thousands of independent
buyers, hundreds of independent
sellers, each piece of
sand on the general market
scale, and no one alone
can influence the price.
Another example, so that it might
be better understood.
You encountered a neighbor at the entrance.
He comes from the bazar.
You ask him what tomatoes are for?
He responds, 10 rubles per kilogram.
So what are you coming from?
How soon did that price come up?
Your appearance or not appearing
on the market as a buyer
again can not affect the price.
But you can buy at this price, for 10
rubles, and a kilogram, and 3, and
5, and even 10.
That is, you also feel like
a perfect competitor
in the tomato market, but
not as a seller, but as a buyer.
Let's look at the schedule.
Balanced market price and demand curve
for a product of a particular firm.
Look at two schedules.
The left chart illustrates the demand
for supply in a completely
competitive market.
I repeat again.
There are thousands of buyers and hundreds
of independent sellers.
On the X-axis we place the total
number of tomatoes sold and purchased
on this market.
And what do we see?
That at the price P with the star
we have some market balance.
Demand on the tomato market
from all buyers is equal to
the supply on this market
from all sellers.
Now look at the right schedule.
You see, on the X axis I postpone and
indicate the output, production, volume
of the cumal.
It is a separate company.
This is, in a way, my tomato
acquaintance.
If on the left chart the bill goes for
thousands of tons, then on the right
chart it only goes for tons.
It is a sandstone on a market scale.
And it takes the existing
market price P with a star as a set.
As economists say, it is
a price-taker, the price recipient.
She takes this price as
a set and can sell any quantity
of her tomatoes at that price.
Note that in perfect competition,
it cannot raise the
price.
No one will buy tomatoes.
What's the point of having hundreds
of sellers with a lower price?
And it makes no sense to lower
the price, because at this price
she can sell any amount of
her tomatoes.
It was you and I who saw the first
sign of perfect competition.
Let us go back to our signs,
let us look at the second sign.
Full homogeneity of products,
lack of trademarks.
What does this mean?
The products of different sellers
are completely the same in
the representation of buyers.
Buyers do not distinguish the product
of one seller from another and
the seller himself from the other.
But when you come to the real
tomato market, agree, you will
still walk in the rows, you
will watch.
Here, it seems tomatoes are
red, but this seller seems
to break a little confidence.
This is not possible
in perfect competition.
All sellers on one person and all
products are absolutely the same,
no differences.
Look at the third sign.
Free entry and access
to the market.
This means that there are no barriers,
financial, administrative,
any, that prevented it from
entering the market of new sellers
or the departure of sellers
from this market.
Let us try this example for the
discharge.
Somewhere I read that our current
president Vladimir Putin in his
temporary, worked private transportation
on his jigul.
What did it mean?
That he just one day sat down
at the wheel of his car, went
to the streets of St. Petersburg,
that is, entered the private
market.
A while later, Vladimir Vladimirovich
found an interesting job
as President of Russia.
This means only that he quietly
put his jigguls in the garage
and went to work in the Kremlin.
As easily he entered the market,
so easily he left it.
This is a sign of perfect competition.
There are no barriers to entry
and exit.
The fourth sign.
Perfect knowledge of the market
by sellers and buyers.
Again, if you come to the real
tomato market, then you'll
probably walk in the rows,
again, looking.
Maybe there are tomatoes
better or a little cheaper.
This is not possible in
perfect competition.
All sellers and all buyers are there.
They seem to be together at one point.
All market information
is instantly disclosed.
It is equally available to
all sellers and all buyers.
Well, if you summarize all that
I said, you will probably
agree that perfect competition
is abstraction.
Such a market does not really exist.
There are markets that are more or
less close to this ideal, but there
is no perfectly competitive
market in reality.
Then the question.
If there are no competitive
markets, why study them?
The answer is very simple.
For the same reason that the chemist
studies the properties of, for
example, absolutely pure distilled
water, which nature does not exist either.
It is simply impossible to understand
the properties of any impurities unless
we understand, not study the subject in
some perfect state.
I was talking about the first type of
market, perfect competition.
The second type of market is called monopoly.
Read the definition.
Monopoly is a market structure
in which there is only one company
in the market that produces
a product that has no close
substitute.
Monopolies are found at
the national, regional, most often
at the local level.
In Russia there are national
monopolies.
In particular, after the reform
of RAUIS, the federal network
company will monopolize
the power transmission lines.
Or, say, in our country,
it is a national monopoly,
or, say, in our city there is
only one company offering certain
services.
It is a monopoly on the local.
But the next market structure
is more common - oligopoly.
What is it?
See the definition.
Oligopoly is a market structure
characterized by a small
number of operating firms.
Examples of oligopoly.
Two airlines on one
route.
In Moscow, the mobile market is controlled,
if I am not mistaken, by four
companies.
Oligopoly is defined as a situation where there
are less than 20 companies in the market.
This is considered
an oligopolistic structure.
This is a very common case
of oligopoly.
Oligopoly is a very interesting
market structure.
When we looked at
perfect competition,
we saw that when a single
seller makes a decision,
he does not look at
other sellers.
He is a sandstone on the scale of the
market, he simply accepts the
market price.
The monopoly does not look at competitors,
either, for the simple reason
that they simply do not exist in
the monopoly.
But the olegopolist acts as his
own capabilities and the behavior
of other firms allow him.
The olegopolistic situation
is similar to a kind of card game
where there is no single pre-
set model of behavior.
Each player plays as the
cards are allowed and as the
competitors play.
In the context of oligopoly,
strategic behavior is formed.
At the same time, individual olegopolists
can choose one or another form of
rivalry, one or another strategy
of rivalry or adopt a strategy
of conspiracy.
So happens too.
The fourth type of market
is monopolistic competition.
Read the definition.
Monopolistic competition is a
market structure in which
a group of goods that are close
substituents are produced
by a large number of independent
firms.
Try to explain.
Let us remember the perfect
competition.
There were a lot of firms there.
In theory, it is infinite.
In the conditions of monopolistic
competition, may not be so
many, but also very many.
But there are fundamental differences.
Remember, I said that in perfect
competition, the products of individual
firms are absolutely indistinguishable
in the eyes of the buyers.
The companies are completely the same.
This is not the case
with monopolistic competition.
Here, each company has a certain distinction
that distinguishes it, its products
or its own from other firms.
It is a mini monopoly.
It is a mini-monopoly in a very narrow
segment of the market.
Here is example.
There are many cafes in our city, but
I distinguish this cafe from what.
Maybe it's a cafe, I think, maybe
it's a better place to eat in this
cafe, maybe there's a more
sympathetic waitress, maybe the
interior is more attractive, or
maybe this cafe is just
located closer to my home.
That is, in the conditions
of monopolistic competition, I repeat
again, individual firms, possessing
some distinctive features,
possess a small but still
monopolistic power in
a narrow segment of the
market.
And now look, it is necessary
to distinguish between pure
monopoly and monopoly power.
Monopoly power arises where
a single firm has some
control over the price.
It can change the price within
certain limits.
This is not the case with perfect competition.
Please look at the left schedule.
On the left is a very competitive
company.
I have already said that in perfect
competition, a single firm,
being a sandstone on the general
market scale, can sell
any quantity of its products
at the market price.
The function of demand for a product
of a completely competitive company
is a horizontal line.
The market can buy any quantity
of its products at the current
market price.
Changing the price of a completely
competitive company cannot by definition.
But a firm with a monopoly
power may change the price to
a greater or lesser extent.
Please look at the right schedule.
There, the demand function for the
company's product has a negative slope.
This means that the company can
raise or lower the price.
But it is clear that by raising the
price, it will face a decrease in
demand for its product.
And if the price is lower, it will face its increase.
No super monopoly can abolish
the laws of demand.
But what is obvious is that it is important
that the more the slope of demand
for a company's product, the lower
its monopoly power.
So I have just said that by the inclination
of the demand function on a firm'
s product, one can judge how
great its monopoly power is.
Well, please look at the quantity of the
goods, as always, the price of the goods,
and let's say the function of demand
is going like this.
Look what it means.
You see, the function has a
fairly high tilt.
So, a firm can raise the price quite
significantly from P0 to P1, see,
a significant price increase, without
fear of losing a large volume
of demand.
In other words, it is difficult for the consumer
to do without the product of this company.
Even with a large price rise, the
fall in demand will be minor.
We say that the company
has a high monopoly power.
Now imagine a monopoly
competitive company.
The function of demand for its product goes
very much by logo.
So, the company can raise the price.
This is the demand function for its product.
But note, the company has
raised the price very slightly.
How much did you lose in demand?
very much.
A slight price increase has led
to a significant decline in demand.
Why so?
In the context of monopolistic
competition, the product
has many substitutes.
Therefore, with a slight increase
in the price, buyers can easily switch
to the product of other companies.
What extreme case?
The perfect competition.
When the line of demand for the
company's product becomes such a slope
that it becomes horizontal.
The company has no
control over the market
price.
He can only accept the price.
Now let us look at the reasons
why monopoly power
can arise and exist.
I identify three reasons.
The first reason is very simple.
Exclusive rights
granted by authorities.
Well, let's say, local
or regional authorities,
or all-Russian authorities, only my
firm is allowed to engage in this
type of activity.
Other companies simply do not
get the appropriate license.
This leads to an administrative
monopoly.
If the license is granted to several
companies, we are given an administrative oligopoly.
Now let us talk about the second reason
for the existence of monopoly power.
It is the exclusive ownership
of any production resource.
I have said many times that
to do something, you need
resources.
Imagine, please, that some important
resource for the production
of this product is in the
exclusive property
of this firm.
Only she can produce
this product.
Others can't, and our company
is a monopolist.
The example.
Alcoa was once the monopoly
on the American aluminum
market.
Her monopoly was based on
the fact that she alone
owned all the bacit fields
in Chile.
Only a surgeon can perform
this operation.
He is the monopolist of his talent.
Only he has the teaching talent,
and on this basis there
is a monopoly.
Or only this company has a patent
on the latest technological
development.
It is becoming a monopoly.
If a resource belongs to
several firms, it is no longer
a monopoly, but an oligopoly.
The third reason for monopoly power
is the increasing return on scale.
Here it is a little more difficult.
Let us remember what is
increasing return on scale.
What does she mean?
When does it emerge?
When do we talk about increasing
scale?
When the number of resources
used increases by N times, production
increases by more than
N times.
We talked about this, if you remember,
in the previous topic.
But if there is an increasing return
on scale, it means that
the larger the output, the less
the company costs per unit
of products.
Think really.
The company is twice as large
as a small company.
It uses twice as much labor
and capital.
And the output of it increases by three times
at the same time.
This means that the unit
cost of the product will be less.
So, in this case, the larger the volume
of production, the less the cost per
unit of products.
Once that happens, the companies are starting to grow.
In fact, look at it.
Here is the beginning of the twentieth century.
Dozens of independent companies
operated in the United
States.
What happens next?
With the cash, several firms have grown.
The amount of resources increased in
them, well, suppose, conditionally twice.
The output has increased four
times.
So, the larger company
costs per unit of product.
Less than smaller companies.
What does this lead to?
Big companies are growing,
small companies are breaking down.
In the end, there may be
only one company on
the market.
If there are several companies in the market,
we are talking about a natural oligopoly.
See the definition
of natural monopoly.
The natural monopoly.
A natural monopoly is a company
that can meet any market demand
with small and lower long-
term average costs than those
that would have been
created if two or more
companies were in the
market instead.
What is the nature of
natural monopoly?
The fact that its special monopoly
position is not based on
administrative resources, not
on some other factors that can be
eliminated in principle, and
its monopoly position is based
on the cost advantages.
Hence an important conclusion.
It is pointless to fight
against natural monopoly by its scaling.
If we create two instead of one
large firm, which is a natural
monopoly, the production of
each will be twice as small as that
of a large firm.
The cost will be higher
per unit of product.
Well, here I will try
to illustrate the natural monopoly
by a number of examples.
Here is the simplest example.
In our homes in the kitchen two pipes,
one with hot water, the other with cold water.
Water to our homes is supplied by one company,
the water channel bridge.
But monopoly is bad, most
often.
And, well, when monopoly is usually
overpriced, it is usually
low quality.
Why then, if the monopoly is bad,
why do we then, in pursuit of competition,
do not carry on every kitchen
a lot of hot and cold water
pipes, belonging to
different companies?
Companies could compete
with each other.
And we could choose the water
that is cheaper or, say, cleaner.
It is not done for a very simple reason.
The cost of each liter of water will increase.
Here is a very conditional example.
Suppose the consumption of water
per unit of time, no matter, a year,
a month, a day, is conditionally
100 liters.
To bring a pipeline with water into the
apartment, you need to spend 100 rubles.
The cost of one liter of
water is one ruble.
Now imagine that in pursuit of competition
we have spent at least two pipes
in the apartment, supplying water,
which is delivered by
different companies.
Two different companies supply water to
our homes.
But then, if two pipes, the cost of
the padding will increase exactly twice
and now make up 200 rubles in total.
And the consumption of water in the
apartment will remain, it will not change
from this, will remain as -still 100 liters.
And what will happen?
The cost of each liter is 2 rubles.
So, this means that it is not profitable
to create several companies competing
with each other instead
of one monopoly.
The unit cost of products will increase.
This is a natural monopoly.
I repeat, a natural monopoly is
a firm whose monopoly position
is based on cost
advantages and is associated
with increasing scale returns.
If we create several companies
instead of one, the cost
per unit of the product
will increase.
How did we get it?
In my conditional example.
Another example.
RAU of Russia.
This company is doing a lot
now.
It is engaged in both
power generation and
transmission through
power lines and through
its subsidiaries.
Well, look, let's say, it's all power
plants that generate companies.
This is the electric transmission line.
It is the sale of electricity to consumers.
Which of these three
areas of activity is a
natural monopoly?
Clear electric transmission line.
The reform of the RAO of the
EU envisages its elimination in its
present form.
From the RAO of the EU will
be separated as independent firms
wholesale generating companies
and territorial generating companies.
Generation can be in the field of competition.
Generating companies can
compete with each other.
There is no natural monopoly.
The electricity transmission line should
be one.
Because if we put another line
next to that line for competition.
The cost of the installation will increase
exactly twice.
The cost of each kilowatt hour of
electricity transmission
will increase.
The electricity transmission line
is a natural monopoly.
And after the reform of the RAU
EU, the power transmission line will
remain owned by the federal network company.
This would be a natural monopoly
in which the control of the stock
is owned by the state.
well well well.
And if we take the sphere of Gazprom,
what is there a natural monopoly?
Gas pipelines obviously.
Independent companies
can produce gas.
But here is the pipe, until it is of course
not filled to the end, it is better
if there is only one.
Otherwise, the cost of gas transmission will increase.
Every unit of gas, I mean, will grow.
In the RAO and RZD field,
the Russian railways are
a natural monopoly.
The roads and all
the railway infrastructure.
Vans and locomotives are
private property.
It is owned by independent
competing companies.
They are not natural monopolies.
This is actually going on.
Sooner or later, only roads and infrastructure
will remain in the property of RAO and the Railway.
The rest will be owned
by independent firms that
will compete with each other.
So, we have looked at the different
types of existing market structures.
Now, we go to the second issue of this topic.
income of the company.
First of all, the concept of gross
income or revenue of the company.
It is marked by the letters TR Total Revenue.
gross income or income.
What is it?
It is very simple.
The revenue of the company is the product of the
price of the goods on the volume of production.
On the slide you can see the formula.
TR is equal to P multiplied by Q.
The usual formula of revenue.
Another term used is the average
income of the company.
The average income of the company.
Look at the slide.
This is a private revenue division on the
volume of release or implementation.
But it is not difficult to understand that
if the revenue on the volume of release will get the price.
So average income is just another
name for price.
Graphically, it is possible to build
a revenue function if we deal with
a completely competitive company.
What is different, remember?
A completely competitive company
has a price set.
The company cannot change the price.
And hence it follows that the function
of revenue from the release of a completely
competitive firm is a linear function
that comes from the beginning of the coordinate.
With zero release, the revenue is zero.
In the single issue, we get the issue
multiplied by the given price and
so on.
The function of revenue will
be linear.
The next very important concept in
microeconomics is the limit income.
Margin of Revenge.
The definition of the limit income is
read on the slide.
The company's limit income is
the increase in revenue when sales
increase by one unit.
That is, MR is equal to Delta
TR divided by Delta Cube.
Does nothing remind you of
the limit income?
Something of what we studied, looked
at in the previous topic.
Remember, in the previous topic we
talked about the limit costs?
Let us remember.
Limit costs are the increase in total
costs, with the increase in production
by one unit.
A marginal income is the increase in
revenue, with an increase in output
or sales by one unit.
Accordingly, the limit income is the
additional income that the company
receives when it releases and sells
an additional unit of the product.
Here is the simplest example
of calculating the limit income.
Look at the slide.
Yes, just another small comment.
If we are talking about a completely competitive
company, then its marginal income
is equal to the price of the goods.
Well, in fact, a completely
competitive company sells any volume
of its products at the
current market price.
The price for a completely competitive
company is set.
And if so, then each additional
unit of release brings such
a company an additional
revenue, the additional
income is equal to this
price.
Well, if a company, for example, sells products
all the time at the price of 10 rubles,
then each additional unit of release
will increase the company's revenue
by those same 10 rubles.
The marginal income of a firm, a
firm that is completely
competitive, is necessarily
equal to the price of the goods
at which it sells its products.
Well, and look, please, at the table,
on the slide.
In the first column, the company's issue
changes.
I change it from zero to five.
The price, as we have said, for
a completely competitive company,
is constant.
10 rubles is.
By multiplying the price by the volume of sales,
I get the company's revenue.
It changes with the change of the release.
You see it changes linearly.
0, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50
What we just talked about.
What is the limit income?
Let us count.
What is the Limit Income?
This is the revenue delta, that is,
the increase in revenue divided by the
increase in release.
The increase in output here is always
one, and the increase in revenue
is always ten.
That is, the marginal income is equal,
I repeat, to the price of a product
for a completely competitive firm, I repeat.
For monopoly, this will no longer be the
case, we will talk about it again.
We move to the third question.
The balance of a completely competitive company.
Here we proceed from the fact that
the company seeks to maximize
its profit.
What is Profit?
It is very simple.
Look at the slide.
Profit is the difference between
the company's revenue and its total costs.
That is, the profit is equal to TR
revenue minus TS total costs.
And again, the company wants this
difference, that is, to maximize profit.
Theoretically, the problem is solved very simply.
The profit of the company is maximum
at such volume of production, when
its limit income becomes equal to
the limit costs.
How to explain?
See also.
My company is engaged in the production
of a product or service.
Let's say I'm increasing the issue
by one more.
I will receive an additional income
or in our terms a limit income.
It is good.
But at the same time I will have to
bear additional costs.
It is bad.
However, if the additional
income, i.e. the marginal income,
is higher than the additional costs,
i.e. the marginal costs, then
the additional unit
of production will increase
the profit of my firm.
And while the marginal income exceeds the
marginal costs, the increase in output
leads to an increase in the profit of
the total profit received by the firm
from all output units.
So once the marginal income was
equaled with the marginal costs,
the additional unit of production
ceased to increase the company'
s total profit.
The total profit reached its maximum.
Thus, the profit is far greater than
that of a competing firm at the maximum,
at the volume of production at which
the price at which it sells its
products is equal, becomes equal
to its limit costs.
Let us make it more clear,
let us look at a conditional
numerical example.
Here, please, look at the table
in the first column of the change of the
release from zero to ten.
The second column is constant costs.
Well, the fixed costs they do not
change by definition, they do not depend
on the release.
You see, all the time 60, no matter what
the volume of release.
The third column variable
costs shows how variable costs
change along with the change
in output.
These amounts are given initially.
All other values, at least
in terms of costs, are
calculable.
Knowing the fixed and variable
costs, we can calculate
the total costs.
We can calculate the average
constant costs, the average
variable costs and the average
total costs.
I hope you remember the formula.
Finally, in the next column,
we have the limit costs.
How do we get them?
The cost, look again.
Limit costs are the increase in
total costs, with the increase
of production by one unit.
My number is growing by
one.
I divide the increase in total
cost per unit by the increase in production.
So, when moving from zero
to zero, the total cost
increases by 32 rubles.
This is the limit costs.
These additional costs will have to
be borne if we want to increase
the output from zero to one.
Furthermore, the output was increased
by one from one to two.
How much does the total cost increase?
of 20 units.
This is the limit costs when moving
from issue one to issue two
and so on.
Note that the limit costs
first decrease, then reach
the minimum, when the four
limit costs become
minimum, and then the limit
costs start to increase.
That is, we are dealing
with the classic U-shaped curve
of the limit cost.
That we have already mentioned in
the previous shadow.
The next column is the price.
But if a firm is completely competitive,
then, as I have said many times, the
limit income of such a firm is
always equal to the price of
the goods at which it sells
its products.
So the price I set, the conditional price
of 30, the limit income of a completely
competitive firm is constant
and equal to the price.
Now look closely at the table.
We increase output all the time and
here, starting with two output
units, the limit income or price
exceeds the limit costs.
For example, in issue 3, the limit
income is equal to what?
The maximum cost is 12.
What does that mean?
That if we release a third
unit of products, our profit will increase.
In fact, look at the last column.
Profit in this zone is
still negative, but with increased
output, negative profit begins
to decrease.
That is, the profit is increasing.
And look, here at issue 5 we already
get a positive profit.
It is equal to 8.
However, we will not stop
at this edition.
Why is?
Because if we produce a sixth unit
of the product, what is the
limit income?
30 is
It is always 30.
The maximum cost is 18.
That is, the sixth unit of products
will require 18 rubles of additional
costs, but will bring 30 rubles
of additional income.
Meaning is.
How much will the profit increase?
for 12 rubles.
In fact, when the release 5 profit
was 8, and when the release 6 it is already
equal to 20.
The profit increased by 12 rubles.
Let us see further.
In the 7th edition, what do we see?
Limit income 30, limit expenses
24.
So, an additional unit of release
increases our profit by 6
rubles.
So it happened.
The profit increased by 6 rubles and
reached 26 rubles.
When is the profit maximum?
It becomes maximum, strictly
speaking, at the time when the limit
income is equal to the limit costs.
See, when you issue 8 the
limit income 30, the limit expenses
also 30.
They were compared to each other.
This means that the profit
has stopped increasing.
If the marginal income of the 8th
edition were at least a penny
more than the marginal cost, this
additional unit of output would
increase our profit.
So, just as soon as the
marginal income equaled the
marginal costs, the profit reached
its maximum.
But here is the ninth unit of products,
note, to release is pointless.
Why is?
What is the limit income of the
ninth unit of product?
Thirty as usual.
What limit costs will it require?
and 40.
So the ninth unit of the product
will reduce our total profit by
ten rubles.
So it happened.
The total profit at nine units
of release is only sixteen.
The maximum point is passed.
In the case of the release, eight companies
are in a state of balance.
It is not beneficial to reduce
or increase its output.
Now we'll look at the same thing,
but on the schedule.
Look carefully, do not rush
to what is shown here on this chart.
Well, all these charts could be obtained
if we started to transfer the numbers
from the previous table
to the chart.
In fact, yes you see the price line,
it goes horizontally parallel
to the X axis, the release axis.
The price is set.
It does not change with the
change of the release.
The price changes, and the price is constant.
And the limit income, as we have said,
is equal to the price.
In my example, the price was 30 rubles.
And she does not change.
not change.
Look at the limit cost
function.
What are the limit costs?
First they decrease, then they begin to grow.
This is reflected in the drawing.
Do you see the cost limit function?
First it decreases, then at some volume
of release reaches a minimum,
then the MC function
begins to increase.
See you?
Now look at the AC function.
What is AC?
This is a function of average total costs.
What is she?
Back to the table.
Look at this function.
That is so.
It first with the increase of
the output, the average total cost
of AC decreases, then with the release
7 as you see reach the minimum
and then the average total cost
starts to increase as actually reflected
in our figure.
In this picture, there are
several critical points.
The first point corresponds to Q1.
Please see what we observe
in the release interval from 0 to
Q1.
In this interval, the limit costs
look closely above the price
of the product or the limit
income of the company.
In this period, the company'
s losses only increase.
So it is.
See you?
In the range from 0 to 1, the limit costs
are greater than the limit income.
Accordingly, when issuing 1 loss
of the company a negative profit.
The biggest ones.
Look further at the painting.
What do we see in the release interval
from Q1 to Q2?
In this interval, the limit income is already
greater than the limit costs.
This means that each
additional unit of release already
increases our profit.
But the total profit remains
negative due to the load of past losses.
What do we see in Q2?
In this Q2 issue, the price of the
goods becomes equal to the
average total cost.
See this?
In Q2, the price is equal to the
average total cost.
The price is equal to the average cost.
The average and total costs
are the costs per 1 issue.
If the price is equal to the cost
of 1 issue, the profit becomes
zero.
Therefore, the Q2 release corresponds to the
point of non-loss of the company.
When issued 2, the profit of the company is zero.
When issued from zero to Q2, the company
is losing.
It is in the loss zone.
And only when it reaches the Q2 release the company
brings the ends to the ends for the first time.
It reaches the point of unprecedentedness.
If we are less, we are doomed to loss.
If we reached Q2 release, the company
has reached this release.
Loss is zero, but profit
is zero.
We are at the point of unfailingness.
What further increase in the output
leads to?
That the price is already above
the average total cost.
That is, with each unit of product
we get more money than the
cost per unit of product.
So we are in a profit zone.
And look, the price always
exceeds the limit costs.
So the more we produce,
the more our profits.
The more our profits.
Where is the maximum profit?
It is maximum, as I said, at
the point where the company'
s limit costs become
equal to the price.
In the Q3 release.
In Q3, the company receives
the maximum total profit.
well well.
And if we are going to increase
output, beyond Q3, what do we
get, what do we see?
The limit costs are already higher than
the price.
This means that the maximum profit
is passed.
Maximum profit is reached.
Profit has already begun to decrease.
The balance point of the completely
competitive Q3 company.
With this issue, the company receives
maximum profit.
If the company still increases the output,
in the interval from Q3 to Q4 the
profit is still positive, but the
maximum is passed.
And when the Q4 is released, what do we see?
The price of the goods again becomes equal
to the average cost, or the cost per
unit of the product.
But if the price is equal to the
cost per unit of product, the total
profit becomes zero.
This is the second point of unfailingness.
But if we continue to persevere,
continue to build output,
we will already have
a negative profit.
We will fall into the zone of loss again.
Let us complicate the situation a little.
Imagine what terrible happened.
I have said that a completely
competitive company has no
control over the price.
Despite the company's will, the market price
has fallen.
And now it is...
Look at the new slide.
The market price is 24 rubles.
All other data regarding
costs remain the same.
What does this mean now?
Look closely at the
last column, the last column.
At such a low price, the company
is doomed to losses at any volume
of production.
Whatever the issue, the company
will be losing.
What can the company do in such conditions?
It can only minimize the loss.
Maximum profit in this case means
the minimum of the loss received,
but the rule remains the same.
When is maximum profit achieved?
When the limit income is equal
to the limit cost.
See 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 See
the eighth and ninth columns.
In the eighth column, we have the
limit costs, in the ninth column,
we have the limit income equal to
the price.
Where are the limit costs equal
to the limit income?
7 in the issue now.
And look at it, please.
This will maximize the profit of the company.
In other words, the loss is minimal.
Repeat maximum profit in this
case means receiving the
minimum loss.
The loss is minimal at release 7.
But here comes the main question.
See you?
The company cannot avoid losses.
At such a low price.
It can only minimize the loss.
But maybe it's worth just stopping?
Stop production and all.
We cannot avoid losses.
Let us close.
Stop the release of products.
If the product is damaged, we
will stop production.
and all.
In fact, it would be a bad decision.
Why is?
Let us consider the cost theory.
In the short term, there are constant
costs that cannot be avoided.
Even if the company closes, that is,
the output will be zero.
There are constant costs that
will still have to be borne.
What are the constant costs?
They are equal, see the second
column, 60.
If the company closes, it will
lose revenue.
She produces nothing,
sells nothing.
The revenue will be zero.
It will save on variable
costs.
With zero output, the variable
costs, as you can see, are also zero.
But the constant costs will still have
to be borne.
This means that the company's losses will
be greater.
And if we close, the company's loss will
be equal to the constant costs.
This is reflected in the last column.
In case of zero-issue, the profit of the company
is minus 60.
That is, the company is losing
60 rubles, and this loss is exactly
equal to constant costs.
Well, if it is all not very
clear, I will try to give this
practical example.
Well, you probably know that
our country is now bathing in oil dollars.
The price of our oil brand "Jurls"
is above $ 60 per barrel.
It is hard to believe now, but in the
98th year, the average annual
price of our oil, the world price
was about $11 per barrel.
At such a low price, many of our oil
companies suffered losses.
But they did not close.
Why is?
Because in the short term
there are constant costs
that cannot be avoided.
And if the companies closed our oil
companies, they would be moving to pump oil.
They would lose revenue,
save on variable costs.
But in the oil tank there is a large
amount of constant costs that
must be borne regardless
of whether you produce something
or nothing.
In this case, the losses would be
even greater.
This is reflected in my conditional
number example.
I tried to show the same thing
in the painting.
Look at the next slide.
What is the optimal edition?
Let us go back to the
previous slide.
The optimal output is 7.
At issue 7, the company's loss
is minimal, that is, the
profit is as much as possible.
What is the revenue with this volume
of release?
168 is
What are the total costs of this
volume of release at issue
7?
See also.
Column TC, total cost, total cost.
184 is
So what do we observe?
That we have the total cost,
I said, exceed the revenue, we
are losing.
What are the variable costs of the 7th
edition?
124. the
What are we watching?
The revenue does not cover
the total cost.
This is yes.
It covers variable costs
and partly covers fixed costs.
Look at the painting.
In the best case, what is
our income?
168 is
Total costs are 184.
Variable costs of 124.
The permanent 60.
They are always 60.
Here we see that revenue
covers variable costs and partially
covers fixed costs.
If we stopped the production,
we would lose revenue, save
on variables, and suffer even more
losses in the amount of all
the constant costs.
When will the company leave the market,
even in a short period of time?
Here is when.
Look at the next slide.
When the price falls to such
a low level that revenue with optimal
output will not even cover
the variable costs.
There is no point in staying
on the market and continuing production
in a short period of time.
I have to stop publishing.
We will lose revenue, but we will
save on variable costs and the
loss will be still less than
if we stay on the market.
Now I try to depict it all,
to show it all in the graphs.
See also.
The cost functions are traditional.
As it was, it is all left.
There is nothing new here.
The price is equal to P1 at the beginning.
Which issue does the company choose?
Q1 is
Why Q1?
Because we remember the rules.
Profit is maximum at such volume
of production, at which the price
or limit income is equal to
the limit costs.
The price is equal to the limit costs.
Imagine that regardless of the will
of the firm, a completely competitive
firm does not affect the price,
as we said, the price drops
to the level of P2.
Where is the issue where the
profit is maximum?
It is profit maximum always with such
volume of production, where the price
is equal to the limit costs.
Where is this crossroads?
The point is now E2 and Q2 release.
But with this issue, the company
no longer receives any economic profit.
At this price and this issue, with this
issue, it is better to say so, with
Q2, the price is equal not only
to the marginal costs, but also
to the average total costs.
Look carefully.
Do you see the average total cost line?
The AC line.
The AC function decreases, then
reaches the minimum to the E2 slurry.
At the P2 price, the company does not
get any profit.
And no losses.
The economic profit is zero.
And if the price drops to P2, to
P3, what are we now watching?
For any volume of production, the price is below
the average cost.
Cost per unit of product.
Losses are inevitable.
But nevertheless, to minimize
the loss, the company chooses
the release always one where the
P3 price is equal to the limit cost.
This is Q3 release.
The company is losing.
It minimizes the loss at this point.
But note what is important, when
the price at the Q3 release
price exceeds, look carefully,
the average variable cost.
Look carefully.
When Q3 is released, we always
have P3 price, and the AVC
function is lower.
This means that while remaining on
the market, the firm partially covers
variable costs and partially
covers fixed costs.
So it's better to stay on the market.
What I just told you.
and above.
If the price drops below P4,
see what happens.
If the price drops below P4, what
will the price be?
The minimum of the average variable cost.
In this case, the company should close
in a short period of time.
The revenue will not only cover
fixed, but also variable costs.
Further production
will only lead to losses.
The E4 point is called the escape
point in microeconomics.
Point E4 is the minimum point of
the average variable cost.
If the price drops below, the revenue will
not cover the variable costs.
Must be closed.
But I repeat, this is the theory of
the company's balance all – yet in a
short period of time.
Once again, if the price is, for
example, P3, the company will
be losing.
But in a short time, it will remain
on the market.
Otherwise, the losses will be even greater,
because there are constant costs that
cannot be avoided in a short
period of time.
What is the difference between a long period
and a short period?
In the long run, all costs
can be revised.
For example, in the short term,
the lease contract cannot be
revised.
Rental is a constant cost.
The rent is covered by contract.
The rent cannot be avoided.
What can we do in the long run?
To give up this lease,
re-conclude, change the
lease contract, find some
other room, try to
optimize costs.
Therefore, in the long term, the company
receiving a loss from the market will, of
course, come out.
If not, change the cost.
For example, a more profitable rental
contract.
Now to the fourth question.
We have talked with you about the
balance of a completely competitive company.
Now let's talk about how the
balance of a company with
monopoly power is achieved.
I remind you.
A company with a monopoly power
can control the price within certain
limits.
It can set a higher price.
But then it will face a fall in
demand for its products.
It can set the price lower, the demand
for its products will increase.
So what is the task of a monopoly?
The monopoly is a price maker, a price-seeker.
Its task is to set such a price, respectively,
to choose such a volume of
release, in which its profit
will be maximum.
The general rule of profit maximization.
Profit is maximum when the limit
income is equal to the limit
cost, this rule is universal.
It is true for any firm, even if it is completely
competitive, even if it is a monopoly,
even if it is an origopolis, even if
it is anyone.
The profit of any company is maximum
when its limit income is equal
to the limit costs at this volume
of production.
Here, the monopoly brings nothing
new compared to a completely
competitive firm.
But there is an important difference.
Remember, I said that in a completely
competitive firm the limit income
is equal to the price of the commodity.
The monopoly has nothing like that.
The monopolist's marginal income
is always less than the price at which
the monopolist sells his products.
This is what needs to be solved.
Let us take the simplest conditional
function of demand for the monopoly product.
P is 10 minus Q.
P is the price, Q is the demand.
What are we watching?
The higher the price, the lower
the demand.
Here is this function, the data taken from
this function I transferred to the table.
Please look at the slide.
Well, see, at the price of 10, let's say,
put a tenth here, the amount of demand
will be what?
and zero.
Okay no?
At the price of 9, if we place
the nine, the demand will be
one and so on.
So, what does the first line
contain?
All possible prices for the monopoly
product from 10 to 0.
The second line contains all
possible values of demand at a particular
price.
Of course yes?
The third line contains what?
Monopoly at different prices.
I hope you remember that revenue is
a product of the price on the volume
of demand.
So at the price of 0 we can not
sell a single unit of the goods,
respectively, the revenue is 0.
At the price of 9 we can sell one unit
of the goods of the monopoly.
9 and so on.
and so on.
I would like to reiterate
that monopoly cannot abolish
the laws of demand.
No matter what monopoly I am, at a certain
price, the demand for my products
will fall to zero.
Well, so what are we watching?
What is our revenue?
First it increases, then at the price
of 5 reaches a maximum of 25,
and then revenue begins to decrease.
Now let us calculate
the monopoly income.
The limit income formula is
clearly known.
The limit income is equal to the increase
in revenue divided by the increase
in output.
First, we set the
price 10.
And no one bought anything from us.
Then set the price 9 and bought
one unit of products.
How much has the revenue increased?
From zero to nine, that is, by nine.
Delta TR 9 is equal to the delta of the unit.
The maximum income is 9.
Only in this case would
the limit income be better,
more correct.
Not put under the unit, not under
issue 1, look at the slide, but as
if when moving from issue 0 to
issue 1.
That is, it is the conversion of revenue
when the output increases from 0 to one.
Looking forward.
When we get the 1st edition, what is the revenue?
9 and at issue 2 is 16.
So when the output increases by one
unit from one to two, the revenue
increases from 9 to 16, that
is, by 7.
Accordingly, the limit income
when moving from issue 1
to issue 2 is 7 and so on.
So I filled out the last line,
which contains data on the change
in the limit income.
well well.
And now let's set any volume
of release from those shown
here on our slide.
Let's say, issue 3.
What price do I need to set to
sell 3 units of products?
Look at the first line.
To sell three units of products, the
monopoly must set a price of 7.
What is the limit income in
issue 3?
Look, he will be between, look
at the last line, he will be
between 5 and 3.
It can be rigorously proven
mathematically that at issue 3 the
limit income will be equal to 4.
So, when the issue of 3 is the price of
7, and the monopoly's limit income is only 4.
The monopoly's marginal income is less than the price.
Okay, I will give you another volume.
Let's say there are 5.
Go to 5.
Let it 5.
What is the price of 5?
What price does a monopoly have
to set to sell five units of goods?
The price 5.
What is the limit income in
issue 5?
Look at the last line.
between a unit and a minus.
It can be strictly proven that when
issuing 5 the limit income is equal to 0.
The price is above the limit income.
Why am I leading all this?
I am trying to explain here that in a completely
competitive firm the marginal income,
remember, was always equal to the
price of the commodity.
And the monopolist has a limit income at any
volume of production less than the price
of the goods.
I strongly suspect that this is my explanation,
it seems to be too mathematically
explained, or not.
It seems that yes, according to
the numbers, against the numbers like you can't stop.
But I would like you to understand
this logically.
Why does a monopolist have a marginal
income always lower than the price of
the goods at which he sells his products?
What is the matter here?
Let us give such an example.
well well.
I will try this way.
A very conditional example.
I am a monopolist of selling beer
in this city.
I sell beer alone.
I will not let anyone else into this market.
I am the only seller.
I am very willing to
buy beer, please.
As soon as I become a monopolist, I begin to
play with the price.
On the first day of sale, I set the price
of 10 rubles for a bottle of beer.
How many beer have I bought?
Look at the table.
and zero.
No customer has come to me at
this price.
The price is too high.
well well.
I start to lower prices, I have nowhere to go.
The next day I set the price 9.
How many beer have I bought?
One bottle.
Who came to me?
Or the richest person, or
the biggest beer lover in this city.
At the price of 9 I sold one bottle.
Let me not be pleased.
The next day I set the price of 8 rubles
for a bottle of beer.
The one who bought 9 rubles,
8 will buy, even with great pleasure.
Who will come to me?
There will be a second beer lover,
for whom the price of 9 rubles
was too high, and 8 is right.
So what does it work out?
At the price of 8 I have already sold two bottles.
And now tell me, please, how much
money the second beer lover
brought me today,
the extra money he didn't bring
me yesterday.
He brought me nothing yesterday.
I bought a beer for 8 rubles.
So I got an extra 8 rubles
from him, which I didn't get
yesterday.
It is good.
What is bad?
I lost the ruble on the first buyer.
I bought it for 9 days and now it's
the same price for everyone.
The price is always the same.
Well, at least in my model, the price is
the same for everyone.
So the second buyer brought, on the
second buyer I won 8 rubles, and
on the first I lost a ruble.
So it turned out that the increase
in revenue was not the price, the price
now is 8, and the marginal buyer, it
is understandable why, in fact,
the marginal buyer is less than
the price?
Because when we lower the
price, we lose on those
buyers who could buy the
goods at a higher
price.
Again once again.
On the second buyer I won 8 rubles,
he brought me 8 rubles today,
which yesterday did not bring me.
But the first one brought me yesterday
9 and today he brought only 8, I
sell 8 rubles of beer.
So I lost the first ruble,
and I won the second 8.
The total limit income is
only 7.
The price is above the limit income.
And it can be strictly proved, I do not
use higher mathematics, but simply
standing on my fingers to explain,
it can be strictly proved that if the demand
function is nine, the function of the
monopolist's limit income is also
linear, and its inclination is twice
the inclination of the demand
function, the prileasing function
of demand.
The margin income function is also linear,
written on a slide, and its slope
is twice the slope of the demand curve.
Here, we see that.
See the demand function.
Do you see the limit income function?
The function of the limit income is twice
as fast as the function of demand.
Its inclination is twice as much.
Well, and now let's see with
you how you can show on the
chart of achieving monopoly balance.
Here what do we see?
linear function of demand.
On the other hand, we see the function
of the limit income.
The function of the limit income has, as
I have said, a twice greater inclination
than the function of the demand for
the monopoly product.
And I also put on this picture the functions,
the classic functions of the marginal
and average income of the monopolist.
Excusions, the marginal costs
of the monopoly and its average
total costs.
The function of the marginal,
I repeat, and the average total cost
of the monopoly.
The rules, I said, are always one.
Profit is maximum at such volume
of production, where the limit
income is equal to the limit costs.
Look at the schedule where we
cross the functions of the limit
income and the limit cost.
You see the crossroads?
This point determines the QM issue,
in which the profit of the monopoly is maximum.
What price will the monopoly pay?
This price should be looked for on the function on
the demand curve.
See, we restore the perpendicular
from the QM point up to the intersection
with the demand function.
And from there we lower the perpendicular to the
Y axis, to the price axis.
So, in order to sell QM goods,
the monopoly must set the PM price
for its products.
At this price and such volume of
production and sales, the profit
of the monopolist becomes maximum.
And now finally, please,
can you show the profit, the
amount of monopoly profit
on the chart?
Well look at.
What is profit, remember.
It is easy.
Profit is the difference between
revenue and total costs.
What is profit and revenue?
This is the price multiplied by the volume of sales.
So PM multiplied by QM.
Graphically, this is the area
of the rectangle O PM EQM.
Where are the total costs?
The total cost can be calculated
by multiplying the average total
cost again by the volume of
production.
If so, then the average total
cost is equal to the area of the
rectangle O C FQM.
That is, it is the area of the
lower rectangle, and how do we get the profit?
From the area of the
upper rectangle, we deduct the area
of the lower rectangle.
Accordingly, the profit of the
monopoly is equal to the area
of the rectangle C PM E F.
And a very important conclusion that
follows from all this.
Let us remember the perfect competition.
In perfect competition, the price
at which the company sells its
products becomes equal to
its limit costs at the
point of balance.
There is the equation P equal to MC.
And in the conditions of monopoly domination,
the monopoly sets a price, look
at the figure, above the
limit costs.
See you?
The demand line is above the limit
cost curve.
The monopoly's limit costs at the QM issue
are equal to the OC segment.
The price of the monopolist, the price that the
monopolist has set, is equal to the
OPM segment.
So, I repeat, the monopoly
sets a price that exceeds
the limit costs.
And hence the most important conclusion is that
monopolies are able to overpriced the price and underestimate
the volume of production.
In the conditions of monopoly power, the
price is higher and the output is lower
than in the conditions of competition.
This is the main claim of society
to monopoly.
Monopolies overpriced the price and underestimated
the volume of production compared to the
volume of production that would have been
made if it had had had instead of the
monopoly competition.
This is the main basis
for antimonopoly
policy.
Antimonopoly policy is a policy
of promoting competition.
In the West, anti-monopoly policy has
more than a century of experience.
The first anti-monopoly law in the
United States, if I am not mistaken,
was passed in the 1990s of the
19th century.
We are in Russia 100 years later.
Details about the anti-monopoly
policy are stated in the text of
this lecture, attached to this
visual course.
I will say two words literally that
antimonopoly policy is a policy
of promoting competition.
It is for this it is directed.
In Russia, a new anti-monopoly
law has been adopted.
In 2006, the Competition Protection
Act was adopted.
A very useful law contains
many interesting provisions,
new provisions that aim to
prevent monopoly
domination in the markets.
But on the other hand, our policy in
Russia, the policy of the Russian
government, in this sense, is
at least ambiguous.
On the one hand, a very useful anti-
monopoly law is being adopted.
More and more large companies
are being created under
state control.
The so-called national champions.
On the one hand, we are fighting against monopoly.
On the other hand, we are developing monopoly.
Rosoboronexport is pulling in its
entire orbit.
All new and new enterprises
form holdings under their control.
The same is happening in aviation.
I repeat, you will read more about this
in the text of the lecture.
I would only like to be careful
to question the effectiveness of
such a policy.
Most foreign experts and domestic
experts believe that the policy
of state support for large
companies will only lead
to the fact that these companies
will become ineffective.
State support, lack of
competition will kill business.
Read more about this in the text
of the lecture.